****************
** Notebook 4 **
****************

1
----
*Love*
“And ever has it been that love knows not it's own depth until the hour of separation.” (Gibran, The Prophet, 1923, p. 8)

Love can grind you up. Love cannot be separated from loss.
***

*Fear*
When you resist fear it becomes stronger. When you indulge it, it becomes stronger. This may be true of all emotions. When fear comes abide peacefully with it. No need to shoo it out the door. It, like all emotions is impermanent, a cloud. Treat it like everything else, with loving kindness. 

It came to protect you. If you talk to your fear and get to know it, understand why it has come, and assure it you will take right action you can help it relax until it is time for it to depart. See it kindly to the door and thank it for it's service. Express your appreciation and assure it you will take right action. Then take that action so fear knows it doesn't have to return.

When fear arises take good care of it. Sit with it and 

2
----
accept it's counsel. There may be something to learn, but do not allow fear to be an impediment to right action.

If your actions raise fear in others treat their fear the same way, with compassion and loving kindness, even if their fear causes them to behave badly. Don't let your fear of how they might react stop you from doing what you think is right.

Remember the truth of interdependence. Their fear is your fear too. Treat it accordingly – with compassion. Anger is a destructive emotion. It has no place here. Fear may express itself as anger.  Anger cannot sooth fear. Anger can only feed fear and beget more anger. Treat them both gently.
*** 

* Surrender *
Does surrender have to be sad? Do we mourn the death of ego? Is release from suffering in our tears. If not release, acceptance? Is acceptance a sanctuary? What is the difference between acceptance and resignation. What is the difference

3
-----
between acceptance and release?

With acceptance we are free. We don't deny our suffering or try to avoid it. It doesn't prevent us fro walking the path.  Resignation I nihilistic. We sit frozen, enduring our suffering while waiting for death to release us. We hope to be completely annihilated, or we may harbor the wish for a more auspicious afterlife. 

If we operate freely in this life with total acceptance we need not wish for anything. Total acceptance transforms suffering. With total acceptance we need not wish for or fear any particular outcome in this life or any potential afterlife.

Can we even accept we may have to learn this again and again? (footnote: See my new thoughts on return. We will pass on, but we won't return.) Can we accept that there is no guarantee we will learn it in any given potential lifetime? Can we accept the possibility merit does not accumulate and so the cycle of rebirth and suffering and learning will never end? (footnote: Merit does accumulate through karmic inheritance. 


We (this specific aggregate) will not return, but our karma (residue of our thoughts and actions) will pass to future generations. If our descendants follow the right path suffering can be transformed. If we wish for release in this lifetime must we accept all 

4
----
possibilities. 

It makes sense that most people search for a belief system that offers certainty of annihilation or auspicious rebirth based on some sort of merit system, In such case is it possible to just pick one and take the leap of faith?

How about just follow your heart and accept the pain?

I want a peaceful life and a peaceful death. Peace of ind from taking the path of heart.
***

*Lonely Ego*
Only ego feels lonely. Ego is a mental formation that believes it stands alone and separate. It knows know not it's true nature, that of interdependent arising. It sees the world as separate from itself. It wants to save it or destroy it. Both come from the desire for control, which ego sees as necessary for survival. When/as

5
-----
ego dissolves into the embrace of non-being and impermanence loneliness dissolves. There is nothing left (no illusion of separate self) to be lonely.

This writing is ego in search of freedom. 
***

Measure life in breaths.

*Invite the Buddha to Join You*
There are passages in the Pali cannon that seem to advocate leaving everything and everyone for a life of pure meditation and contemplation. Is this meath to imply we and others have idependent nature? Or, is it instead telling us to abandon our mental formations (concepts)? 

My initial impression of the cannon is that it paints a picture of the wandering nomad. Perhaps that is who I was at the time?

Hinayana and Mahayana each have a section in the cannon. It would be a good idea to re-read them as who I am now.
***

Love makes martyrs of us.

6
-----
*Past, Present, Future*
The Buddha said “The past no longer exists, and the future is not yet here.”

The past lives on in the present, through memory, but we must understand memory is just mental formation. It is not the actual experience. Memory is fallible. It is filtered and contains gaps. Memories can be entirely false, fictitious. 

Memory cannot be fully trusted and so not any mental formations built upon it. projections  and predictions are subject to error. The farther back we go and the farther forward we project the greater the potential for error will be. It is challenging even to interpret what is happening in the present. 

Past and future are sticky notions. It is easy to over-estimate their value to the experience of the preset. We should take each moment as it comes, at least to the best of our ability.
***

7
-----
Does something have to give way for something else to exist? Does the manifestation of something necessarily imply something else become un-manifest? Does the birth of something invariably imply the death of something else? No. It is not a zero-sum game. Things manifest and things pass. That is all. Karma, however, ripples forward.

According to Buddhist doctrine there are seeds of mental formations in our consciousness. Each type of seed requires certain conditions to manifest. The recommended practice is to water the positive seeds frequently and the negative seeds as little as possible. Right though and right action waters the positive seeds. Meditate and make right action a habit.

We are the gardener. Regardless of what happens in our lives we decide what gets watered and what doesn't. Meditate and develop this wisdom and the strength to live by right action. Do this

8
-----
for self and others. Set the example to transmit this understanding.

Stop running.There is really nowhere to go except here and now. You have memories and you can think ahead, but you cannot really be anywhere but here and now.

To a certain extent we can bring past and future into the present, but there will always be a loss of fidelity. This does not mean we should abandon past and future, but we should understand they are not perfect tools.

We can only take action in the present. We can be informed by memories and our vision of a desirable future. These can influence choices we make in the present. We just need to be discerning. Perceptions and memory can be faulty.

Transmission takes place in life, not in death. Forget about the mysterious notions of afterlife. Afterlife may exist, but all we can do is speculate

9
----
about it.

On the other hand, it is possible to understand and explain how what we are and do in this life passes on through genetics and actions. We stand individually and collectively on inheritance from our ancestors, genetic mutations, produced by our environment, and the legacy of our individual and collective beliefs and actions. Succeeding generations inherit all this from us.

When we die we re not coming back per-se. When we speak of “past lives” we really refer to our individual and collective ancestry. When we speak of future lives we really speak of future generations. What we think and do now influences to what extent those generations live in heaven or hell. The cycle will continue until this 

10
-----
lineage and all those spawned by it become extinct.

Just as I say I am not this body I can say I am not this tree. Can I say this tree exists because I exist? Can it exist if I am not here to observe it? Can I exist if there is no one or nothing here to observe me?

I exist because I am self-aware. I don't know about the tree. Sometimes I just feel tired and I wish for oblivion.

Fear is often wrapped in gratitude. Fear of loss. How can we water gratitude  without also watering fear?

Maybe as we water the gratitude we need to talk to the fear. “I am here for you. I will take good care of you. All is part of the garden. I am the

11
-----
gardener.”

You are the ocean waving. No-birth and no-death. Enjoy the rise and the fall. When you wave you  contribute to the movement of all. When you fall you return to stillness. 

You will not return in the same form. You will remain forever at rest, but what you were will ripple on forever through the waves that arose with you, because of you, and forever after you.

When we experience illness we say 'I feel bad.” We imagine our mind and body at war with an invader. Our mind fights against the discomfort.. We tell ourselves we

12
-------
can't be comfortable till it is over. If suffering is great, or chronic we may even question our desire to live.

Looking more deeply we can create a different story. We can gain deeper insight into the nature of our pain and suffering. Say we have caught a mild cold and we are experiencing the usual discomfort that comes with it. If we fret too much about it the mental fight just increases our suffering. Looking at the illness with compassion and understanding can provide relief.

The body is not the enemy. Nor is it a passive victim. When we have a virus some of our discomfort is caused by the interference of the virus with normal processes and some is caused by the interaction between the virus and our immune system's attempts to set things right.

Our body is not betraying us. It is doing it's best to protect against



13
----
the invasion.

We can be grateful for that because without it we would be damaged or dead. But what about the virus? Can we appreciate that? The virus is not trying to benefit us , nor does it have malicious intent. Like every other life form in this universe it is just trying to live and propagate. In doing so it may cause it's host discomfort but in an odd way it bestows a benefit.

Our body exists within the web of all things. It must adapt over time to the forms required for survival in this constantly evolving web. So must all other life forms , including the virus. 

The relationship between the virus and us is in fact symbiotic. It makes virus and body stronger. The push and pull evolves both. So, it is possible to appreciate the contribution of the virus and doing so will help relieve some of our suffering.

Suffering contains seeds of understanding.

14
----
As was illustrated in the previous example, suffering and transformations of suffering are better understood in the context of inter-being. Neither the human body or the virus stand's alone.  Both are members in the web of life. They pursue their own agendas with a common set of fundamental goals - to live and propagate. 

They share a common role - to evolve their respective species. They may “damage” or “kill” each other in their respective evolutionary roles. They have no real choice in this. Each must act in accordance with it's natural role. The relationship they share is part of the larger web of interdependency. 

They are each waves rippling across the entire web in a divine cosmic dance of evolution. Contrary to common belief, evolution does not strive for protection. Evolution responds to itself. There is no birth and no death, only change responding to itself.

“Death” and “destruction” hold seeds of evolution. (add a discourse on what you mean by “death” and “destruction” here)

15
----
*How To Get The Most Out Of Your Suffering*
It is perfectly natural to want to avoid suffering. If we can do something about it we should. If we can't do anything we should practice acceptance. We might not be able to prevent ourselves from worrying, but we shouldn't indulge the worry. We should practice to understand that most forms of suffering are not permanent. They diminish or disappear over time. Indulging in worry only intensifies the suffering. We may not be able to control the source of the suffering, but we can train how we handle it. We can seek some comfort in the impermanent nature of it and we can remind ourselves that suffering holds seeds of understanding. That can aid in our journey along the path .(read Man's Search for Meaning, Victor Frankel)

*Beating The Learning Curve*
We are not coming back , but we can pass on. We can spared succeeding generations the  learning curve and the suffering that comes with it by passing on through oral or written tradition

(Them of Aliens using the androids to evolve themselves. Attempting to stave off impermanence. Ultimately accepting their role as universal nomads.)

16
---
My writing is strictly personal. If I want anybody else to read it I'll publish it. When I publish something I will release it completely. If somebody has opinions about it I will listen. When I listen I will be fully present. I will try to really understand what that person is trying to say and how their mind works. 

I recognize I have a habit or under-estimating people. I will remind myself of this when I interact with others. I will not try to direct the interaction. I will try to simply listen an bring my full attention to that. 

Happiness is not only found at the end of the path. happiness is in every step. With every step we arrive

*Cows*
Suffering holds seeds of release. Suffering encourages us to let go of our cows. These might be material things, relationships, or mental formations. Cows usually hang out with each other. Some cows are there to protect other cows.  If you  decide to let a cow go

17
----
you will probably have to release it's friends too.

Most of us have a lot of worry cows. They have good intentions. They follow us around to try  and protect us, but they really aren't much help. In fact they usually just become a distraction. We always have to solve the problem ourselves anyway, so we can let all these cows go. 

Anger cows are pretty much the same. They try to defend us, but they always end up making things worse. 

Both types are prolific breeders. So it is really best to let them go as early as possible so they don't multiply and overwhelm us.

You can't get rid of cows by force. You just have to open the gate and let them leave. Sometimes they straggle back. Just leave the gate open. They usually don't stay long.

Some cows hang around to take care of other cows. In that case take care for them. When they see they are no longer needed

18
---
they will feel free to go their own way.

Freedom from mental tyranny is a choice. Free your cows and find happiness. Cows don't live in the present moment. As you learn to live in the present moment you have fewer and fewer cows in your life. You become more and more free. Happiness lives in the freedom of the present.

Don't breed cows and don't accept cows from anyone else. Most of us have too many cows. Most of us don't know much about the nature of cows and how to let them go, so we try all kinds of things, like making other people responsible from them.

Don't take on other people's cows. If someone is suffering you can be there for them and listen with compassion as they work their way through. You can share your thoughts judiciously, but don't volunteer to take on their cows and don't allow them to dump their

19
---
cows on you.

Mental health professionals are familiar with the challenge of listening deeply with compassion without becoming identified. When we are trying to be there for someone we must maintain space so we don't inflict our personal belief system on them.

Our cows (we created them) represent past and future. The present is our pasture, hour home.  Past and future are mental formations based on memory and ephemeral projections. 

Cows wander into our pasture from time to time - sometimes more and sometimes less. There is no need to shoo them away. When we see them clearly we know created them, but we also know we are not them. We leave the gate open.

We love them, but we don't cling to them or feed them. They are free to hang around, but they don't normally stay long. 

*Path*
Once we are on the

20
---
path there is no need to rush. We can let go of the idea of attaining, the idea the path is something that existed before we set foot on it, that it has a predetermined end we mus reach or some mountain we must climb, some ordeal we must endure and navigate, some rainbow we must chase.

We don't need to rush and we don't need to wait. The path is created with each step . With every step we arrive and everything we need is already there. The path i s shady and cool. There is no need to step back out into hot sun.

With each step, each breath we arrive to find everything and nothing. We have gone everywhere and nowhere. Mindfulness and no-mind.

*Writing As Meditation*
Swimming down until I dissolve. Thinking until I stip. Writing as koan.

21
---
Writing because I have nobody to talk to (no-body, no body).

*Drink Your Tea Mindfully*
Without mindfulness we drink too fast. Lost in thought we take huge cgulps. We barely enjoy the tasted.Before we know it the ceremony is over. Me missed it and the people we sat with. Regret.

Slow down. No need to hurry. Do not waste time on regret. If you took an un-mindful gulp there is no need to regurgitate it and drink it again. Just take rejoin the ceremony. Take the next sip.

Can you see the cloud in theis piece of paper?

Some people fear birth
22
----
as much as death - even in this world. We fear rebirth into greater suffering. So we spend our lives in guilt, trying to protect and purify our karma. This bondage leaves little room for happiness. Living mindfully we are free from the cage of guilt and regret. We commit no sin.

To experience no-birth and no-death ask anything “What were you before?” No thing comes from nothing. Listen deeply to the answer “I was everything. I am everything.” See the universe in the tea. There is no birth and no death, only manifestation and hiding. The you and the tea are just reflections of mind. The tea is the universe. You are the universe.

From whence does my consciousness of self arise? If I am sitting somewhere with nobody else around to observe me, do I exist? Yes. I am conscious of myself. Where does this consciousness

23
----
come from?

Is it part of me. Is it external to me? Did it exist prior to my manifestation? Was my manifestation dependent on it? Or, did I manifest based on other causes and conditions and my consciousness was part of my manifestation? Did I spontaneously manifest with self-consciousness? Quantum theory implies the observer (consciousness) is necessary for manifestation. Does that mean it has to come first?

Is there a big umbrella of cosmic consciousness that precedes all else? Is that what we call “god”? Is self-consciousness a child of cosmic consciousness? Or, are self-consciousness and self just bubbles that randomly, spontaneously arise from an unconscious cosmos? Or, do myriad selves come forth from a single, cosmic consciousness?

Why do forms shift? Why do we cease to manifest when all things required for life seem to still be readily available? What is it that seems to get used up over the course of a lifetime? Why the cycle of birth, aging, and death?

24
----
What is being depleted or changing that is required for manifestation of this form? Is it the nature of some governing principle to turn the wheel of manifestation and destruction? Is impermanence just the nature of things?

Does anything really exist? Is there anything substantial in the story of our lives - set, props, or characters? Were there really any ancestors? Will there really be any decedents? Is it possible the whole thing is just a cosmic dream? Do cause and effect apply? It would be a great relief to know if they did or did not.

How can we logically explain anything? It is not possible to logically dissect the nature of reality. To open the door to the absolute we must be willing to abandon all logical concepts(logic can only point). We can commune and encourage each other, but each of us must cross the bridge alone. Alone but not alone (inter-being).

25
---
*Random Thought About Religious Doctrine*
Much of the Bible reads like a code of conduct with lists of rules. Most of the rules are about what not to do or think. According to the bible we are all born sinners and headed for external torment unless we follow the rules. If you break certain rules you are damned with no chance to repent. 

For example, if you blaspheme you are going to hell no matter how you try to make up for it. At least that is what some Christian sects believe. The idea that one misstep can doom you for eternity with no chance for redemption is just depressing.

According to mainstream Christian beliefs we are born with original sin. We are bad  from the start. If we accept Jesus as our personal lord and savior we are saved from eternal torture, but we will live our lives in shame because nobody on the planet can live perfectly by all rules, especially with all their esoteric implications. This of itself is a good proxy for hell.

Islam is it's own can of worms. I remember talking to a guy who practices Islam. It seems if you are chosen to walk that path you are blessed. If you were chosen you have the chance to go to heaven if you live by the rules. Those of us who were not chosen are just screwed through no fault of our own.

The idea that living by a rule-set is not unique to any particular religion. Buddhism has the eight-fold noble path. The path is basically a set of guidelines for living. If you stray from the path you will suffer. The attractive thing about Buddhism though is it is forgiving by nature. It is Buddhist belief that we are inherently perfect, but ignorant and confused about our true nature. 

If you step off the path you remain ignorant and confused and so you suffer, but you can always step back on the path. Just being on the path offers relief and ultimately release from ignorance and confusion.

All spiritual pursuit requires an act of faith. Christianity, Islam, and Buddhism all have rules and rituals. We can find immediate relief if we simply believe in these and do our best to follow them. We start by working top-down - following the rules and observing the rituals with faith that they will offer immediate relief. Our belief is what makes it work.

As we make progress with this

26
---
our meaningless behaviors will diminish. In the mean time digressions are not as likely to pull us down. 

Here is the rub between common Christian belief and Buddhism. Christian beliefs revolve around the idea that we are all born “bad” and need to be saved. Buddhist belief is that we are all inherently good and just don't see it. Perhaps the Christian belief about original sin somehow transmutes as one follows that path and at some point we become cleansed. 

Maybe that's the point of theBaptism ritual - washing away our sin. Maybe at that point Christian and Buddhist ideologies come to an intersection in the belief that we are inherently good. This has to happen one way or the other if we are to find final release. 

The operating assumption has to be that we are fundamentally good - whether born that way or washed of our sins. From there it is just a matter of peeling away the onion that obscures our understanding and belief in this. The method is to treat ourselves an others with loving kindness.  

Release comes from the bottom-up. We have to take our minds beyond good and evil, beyond pleasure and pain, and ultimately beyond all dualistic concepts. We must escape the vortex of our mental formations. We must be able to see reality as it is in the moment and act in accordance with that. In reality there is no fundamental problem. The suffering in the world comes from our un-settled minds.

*Walking Meditation*
Make each walk with your loved one a mindfulness meditation. Walk every day. It is part of your meditation practice.

*Coffee*
Think of the millions of micro-organisms that went through the cycle of birth and death that made the nitrogen to enrich the soil in which this coffee was grown. Rippling from one form into another. Is there any end to it?

In order to do anything we have to use time that could have been spent on other things. The choice

27
---
to do one thing over another is a form of sacrifice. Do is not-do. Everything we do is a sacrifice. To make the most of this we should live as much as we can according to the six paramitas (perfections) and the eight-fold noble path.

Doing so honers our ancestors and transmits good karma to our descendants. When we pass out of this form we ripple forward in theirs. We are part of them just as sun and rain are part of the flower.

It is not really accurate to say we arise in our descendants. There is no eternal self. Individual self is an illusion. We arise interdependently with everything else. We arise interdependently with our descendants. Our karma is intertwined with theirs. We and everyone we meet, everything we experience inter-are.

Karma is not passed down when we die. Our karma contributes to their karma right now, in the eternally present moment, and their karma contributes

28
---
to ours. Karma arises interdependently. To say karma is passed down implies time and space. Time and space only exist as mental formations. How can anything be “passed down”? How can anything arise “'after” or even in a different “space” than anything else?

This is interesting to ponder, but for practical purposes we can think of it this way: Our karma is intertwined in this life and intertwined by legacy when we pass out of this life. So we should follow a righteous path as best we can for the benefit of ourselves and everyone and everything around us.

Is karma impermanent?

Consciousness is part of manifestation. “We are made of elements called form, feelings, perceptions, mental formations, and consciousness.” (Hahn, You are here, 104)

29
---
Consciousness is one of the five aggregates and aware of all the others. It is even aware of itself though it cannot directly observe itself. The sense of “I” arises from consciousness.

According to the first dharma seal nothing is permanent - not the aggregate nor any of it's elements - including consciousness.

Is there a big umbrella of consciousness overarching all manifestations or is consciousness simply one of the elements of impermanent ever evolving manifestations?

In this sense consciousness is as everything else. Nothing is permanent. Attachment is grounded in the wish for permanence. It is the basis of suffering. Meditate on this.

Karma is also subject to the

30
---
seal of impermanence, so it isn't quite correct to think o it as something solid that can be passed on. However, karma, like rain and sunshine is an element of interdependent arising.

Does a flower have consciousness? How can I know. I can only say my consciousness manifests the flower to me. How does it manifest? It manifests out of my consciousness. The flower and I are part of an inter-dependent web. The elements of my form, feelings, perceptions, mental formations and consciousnesses must be present - along with everything else in order for the flower to manifest to me.

If anything is missing the potential for the flower will be there, but it won't manifest to me is there anything in this world for which this is not true?

How can two people agree on how the flower looks. Are they seeing the same flower?

31
---
What happens to the flower when you are not there to observe it?

The potential for the flower will still be there, but since you are not there to observe it the flower can no longer manifest to you.

If someone else is there they may see a flower, but since they aren't you it won't be the same flower. Elements of your flower are still there, but it won't manifest to them. They will see their own flower.

“Without death there is no birth.” (Thich Nhat Hanh, You Are Here, 119).

In order for something to change other things must give way. In order for something to evolve the old version of it must effectively die. Some things must “die” to satisfy conditions for other things to be “born”.

32
---
*Game Theory*
Why not go all in on the game - even though you know it is inevitably going to come to an end? You may get to play the game many times, each time offering a different board, set of pieces and experiences. Or, you may only get to play once. There is no way to know any of this while you are in a game.

Some games last a shorter time and some longer. Play the whole thing. Every part of the game has something different to offer. One of the most fun and interesting parts is to try and figure out how the game is made. What are the rules?

Each action you take influences the layout of the board. Each action causes other players to appear, or change. Actions ultimately change your game experience. The game evolves every time you make a move.

33
---
Accept this interpretation of the three dharma seals. The three are impermanence, non-self, and nirvana (freedom from ideas and concepts). The third (nirvana) actually encompasses the first two since permanaence and self are concepts.

In fact, moving beyond ideas and concepts the concept of nirvana even eats itself. The concept of dharma seals eats itself.

Dogs don't ride horses. (off the story about the man on the horse saying “Ask the horse!)

Each person your see is life looking back at you. An you are life looking back at them. Love is beyond objectification - life communing with itself - beyond physical and mental formations, but experiencing itself and expressing itself through them (mental formations). Objectification obscures the truth.

Seeing the truth, can anything be fundamentally wrong? Is anything a mistake? On that scale

34
---
is anything really a problem? Looking through and beyond mental formations life communicates with itself. Pure love is not a mental formation. Even the word disappears. The indescribable bliss of all and nothing, pure potential, 
the unity of manifest and un-manifest, 
the dance of interdependency. Thins born, existing, and passing away. In all stages satisfying conditions for other things to manifest. Eternal turning of the great wheel.

On this stage plays the drama of the human mind.

*Karma*
Karma travels the web of interdependency. As humans we receive and transmit it through everything we mentally or physically touch. Everything human, animal, or elemental. For example we now recognize the effect human ignorance and attitudes have baked into the baptism


35
---
very earth and we see how the actions we take now can effect the trajectory of our existential future, our evolution.

Work on one thing at a time and let the others chatter in the background. Queue up requests. You can context switch, but you can't multi-task. This is why effective individuals work off of prioritized lists when they have to get stuff done.


* Anger * 
Can it help us break free? Does it bolster our courage? Do we use it as cover to do what we think is right?  Do we use it to justify getting things we want? Do we use it to cover guilt? Do we use it to obscure our suffering, to cloak our sadness? 
***

*Fading Forward*
--
The beauty of the trees, the blue sky, 
	the sunshine on this cool day...
Bitter-sweet impermanence. 

The naivete and optimism of youth recede
	farther and farther into the past.

Fear and resistance to change cause suffering. 
I can not help my self, yet. 

The leaves on the trees turn 
	beautiful Autumn shades of yellow-red. 
 
Change marks time.
Things and people I love change
	and vanish.

Even this planet will eventually disappear.

Whether they go or I go, 
	I will lose them.

Time is a bitch to the mind.
Turning of the colors and geese flying south
	remind me.

The eternal wheel.

Each thing manifesting and passing on,
	makes room for something new.

How to enjoy my coffee and tea,
	knowing the sacrifices that brought them to me?
 
How to enjoy this sandwich,
	and all other good things? 

With gratitude and respect.
--

As I sit here observing the beauty of the trees, the blue sky, the sunshine on this cool day. I feel sad. Instead of simply enjoying this beautiful moment I feel mostly sad because I see impermanence and death all around me. Even this 

36
---
planet as I knew and know it will eventually die.

The naivete and optimism of youth recedes farther and farther into the past. I understand that my fear and resistance to impermanence causes me suffering. I can't help myself, yet.

The leaves on the trees are turning beautiful Autumn shades of red. I mourn the passing of the green. N. It is not that I prefer green. All change marks the passage of time and the of time brings everything I know closer to death. The emergence of the beautiful Autumn colors and the geese flying south are reminders. 

But then, how do I enjoy my coffee and tea knowing the sacrifices required to bring them to my table How do I enjoy my food and all other good things that come to me? 

Gratitude and respect.
***

*Hold Still*
Why can't mind hold still? When we first start to meditate it jumps around like it is dancing barefoot on hot coals. It fears that in the quiet space of meditation it 


37
---
will lose control. Quiet space is an existential threat to an untrained mind. This is not just a selfish desire for power.

Since we were little babies our mind has evolved to build a model of the world and by doing so protect us. Over time it has built our identity. It has convinced itself it “is” us. It is afraid if it stops running we will disappear. Who can blame it for this belief Until now it has received no evidence otherwise.

If we try to use force our mind will fight back. It's self-appointed job is to protect us. We must not treat mind as an enemy to be overcome We should have love and respect for all it has tried to do for us. We have to gently approach it as an ally.
***


*Alone*
I feel separate and alone. No matter what company I keep – self, friends, or family – I feel alone When we are getting along and especially when we fight I feel isolated, separate, and sad.

38
---
Youthful exuberance no longer provides refuge. I feel so alone most of the time.

Who am I that feels this?

Meditate on the sense of self arising from the aggregates. Meditate on inter being for release. It is not easy when you are sad, but it is the only path through the darkness, the only true refuge, the only way to transform the suffering.

Is the creative principle lonely? Is that why it plays hide and seek? For it to be lonely it has to be self aware. Is it? I don't think so.

The ultimate koan:
“Who am I?”
***

*My Friend and I*
The object (flower) is your consciousness.
The perceived is the perceiver (your friend is you)
There can be no subject without an object (observed) and no object without a subject (observer). (Hahn, The Hear of the Buddha's Teaching, p 53)

Perceiver and perceived arise and subside together. There is no 


39
---
perceiver just hanging around waiting for something to see, taste, touch, smell, or think about. There is no object just sitting or floating about waiting to be experienced. Perceiver and perceived exist together. Not one and not two.

If I am my friend who is my friend when I am-not?
I am never not, nor is my friend. We exist interdependently. We don't pass away. We ripple forward through everything we touch.
Are we remembered?
As we ripple forward whatever we become part of remembers us. We remember ourselves.

The ultimate koan:
	Who am I?

I am everything passed forward. I hold the residue of everything and every one that came before, including my myriad selves.

40
---
When my current manifestation passes I will leave my “self” behind as seeds I cultivated. Let them be seeds of light. Let the dark ones “die” with me.
***

*Rain*
Nora Jones on a rainy day,
Perfect mood,
Gentle, quiet rain,
No wind,
Autumn leaves,yellow and red,
Ocean birds floating on updrafts,
 over the gray canvas of a cloudy sky,
I glide peacefully through memories,
	into this vanishing moment.
--

*Beaver Moon*
Waking at the perfect time,
To see the Beaver Moon,
Framed perfectly by diaphanous clouds,
Snow is coming,
I glide peacefully through memories,
	into this vanishing moment.
--

Buddhism is lonely. Maybe we create gods to have someone to talk to. When we speak to god who is listening? Who really embraces or punishes us? Who are we trying to work things out with? Who loves or reviles us?

The hand of this “who” is powerful indeed. When we figure out who god is we are alone again. Who feels lonely?

41
---
*Don't Do That*
There is only “do”. We do things one at a time. Doing something means not doing other things. Instead of saying I should not do something do instead something else.

For example, instead of thinking “I should not sit out here in the cold.” go inside. The choice is usually natural unless you obscure it with rationalizations.

*Pass Through*
We pass into and through everyone and everything. What parts of yourself do you want to ripple forward? Try to understand that everything reflects lit's karma. Don't take anything personally. When interacting with “other” water seeds of light.

Universes come and go. (Inspired by Suzuki, Zen Mind, Control) against an incomprehensible background (ultimate dimension? infinite cosmos?).

42
---
When you get caught in the bus door just have a good laugh.

All activity and manifestation is nature maintaining it's balance - like a tightrope walker making a million small movements to remain still.

There is only do. Not-do is do.

When there is something you should or must do, do it. Otherwise... There is no otherwise. When you must perform action do it. Otherwise do something else. You really have no choice.Don't torture yourself over “should-have”.

If you are hungry eat. If your are sleepy sleep. If you need exercise do it. If you need to socialize do it. You either do or not-do. It is not possible to do nothing. You are either doing something or you are doing something else. 

If you follow your nature there will be no confusion. Your nature is beyond concept, beyond convention, beyond demands and judgment of others.

43
---
Is this place a sanga? If it isn't go someplace else.

Energy is sticky.

“.. if you are lost in thought - whether you are talking or not, thinking you know everything about her she will slowly die.” (Thich Nhat Hanh, The Heart of the Buddha, p 65).

Is it too late to bring her back? You have to come back first. Where have you been? What are you doing now?

The greatest gift you can give her is you fully present with her - knowing you are there and she is there and being grateful for it. You do not have to utter any magic words. Just be there, fully there.

*Hide and Seek*
When we allow mind to drift into fantasy we are hiding. True self lives only in the present. When we feel uncomfortable in the present we hide in future and past. It is not possible to be in more than one place at once. It is not possible to change the past. Future is a ghost. Action is only possible in the present.

44
---
We frequently seek refuge in pleasure. Oddly, if we are too uncomfortable in the present circumstances we choose to hide in pain.

One glass of wine may not hurt you, but what about those around you? What unintended influence does it have? Don't do things that ight lead others down the path to pain. Set the best example you can.

Don't consume anything that has suffering in it's supply chain.

...45
---
No need to die,
 to become,
 water.
The wave is,
 the ocean,
 waving.
Going through this life,
 trying to,
 become?
We already,
 are.
Always have,
 been.
Just,
 rippling.
No forward, no
 back.
Time is a product of,
 mind.

...64
Grief over death and loss are bookends with love and attachment. Some people can't truly love because they can't take the pain. Be one of those who is willing to suffer the pain, for the sake yourself and others. Don't ignore the pain, but don't dwell too much on it. Celebrate love instead. This bitter-sweet life is a blessing. Live it fully.

* How Did We Get Here? *
I read an article this morning about a scientist who speculated about the probabilities that we somehow evolved naturally from non-organic matter versus the probability that we were “put” here.

He posited that the probabilities of us evolving naturally from inorganic materials are very remote because the molecular structures required to support our organic form were unlikely to survive long enough to make the transition from an inorganic state to an organic state, at least not without the aid of some sort of external catalyst.

The article did not explore the nature or potential origins of such a catalyst. On the other hand, the article did not make any argument against it. Instead, it jumped to the possibility that such catalyst might possibly have been another form of intelligence. Did some other sentient race influence our evolution?

Many people reading this, especially those who adhere to belief in man-made gods, will react skeptically, even violently to this notion. However, when you think about it, we aren't that far off. We are already on the brink of being able to colonize other planets, and with the emergence of quantum computing and artificial intelligence, our understanding is likely to expand exponentially in the very near future. We have made tremendous strides in our understanding of genetics and physics.

We aren't far from being able to manufacture human beings with customized traits and quantum physics is already breaking the light-speed barrier. Cognitive scientists are closing in on the question of whether consciousness is of organic origin. If it is they will likely figure out how to store and migrate it.

With the ability to transport our molecules and consciousness from place to place instantaneously, and possibly modify our physical characteristics on the fly, the universe will become our oyster. I we cannot simply inhabit other planets we may at least be able to influence their evolution by introducing the necessary catalysts.

If we go the evolutionary route we will be the “aliens” to the resulting life forms. We may not be able to control the evolution of their culture. Even if we have the ability to “create” them, we may not have the ability to destroy them. We may be left to hope that as they evolve we can become “friends”, and perhaps add ourselves to the number of their citizens.
