Notebook 2
***********

1
---
6/25/2024
Warm and muggy today. A lot of distractions. Not a great day for deep thinking, so I bought a new notebook for brain-drop scribbles. I've been reading through the notebook I filled when J. was in her freshman year in high school. As I come across worthy entries in that I'll transfer them into here, where I can comment and expand on them. (I ended up just writing in other notebooks. The thoughts and themes are spread among them.)

I see some thoughts that are floating around in my head now, written there. I also recognize old questions and calls to action, some of which I resolved and some that remain.

I'm driving J. to summer class three or four days a week this summer. I could use a new car (finally got one in 2025). I can probably write a lot more for the next month or so because I'll sitting around in the student union for a couple hours each day.

J. is driving me crazy over concert tickets. The rule from now on is I'm only willing to front for one friend. Others will have to get their own

2
---
tickets and they can all meet up wherever. They don't all have to sit together. The only reason I started this business was so J. would have at least one friend (not me) to sit with. I'm beginning to feel like I”m supporting an enterprise. While I was writing the previous sentance J. called. She arranged for one friend and stayed pretty much in budget. I also secured her agreement that in the future I am willing to front one friend. I appreciate her understanding.

She shared with me, during our drive, her difficulty getting her friends to tell her how uch they are willing to spend on a concert. This causes her strsss when she bu;yes tickets for them. She is afraid if they think she spent too much they won't pay her back. I advised her to tell them in the future they need to commit or she will not be able to purchase a ticket for them.

3
---
I would rather she make these decisions on her own, but she seems to be in a bind over it. She is afraid if she is assertive about this, nobody will want to go with her. I would rather she be willing to skip the concert or go with me then to be a doormat. She only go three hours sleep last night, worrying about how to coordinate all these non-participating friends.

She sat in queue for an hour and a half this morning, trying to get tickets for for people. Nobody else got in queue to help her and nobody answerd her texts. She passed on a good deal for two adjacent seats because she was trying to get four. When she told A. that she was unable to get four adjacent seats at the agreed price (she had to pull teeth to get this agreement) A. bought two, more expensive, tickets - one for her and one for her little sister.

J. had to go to an after-market vendor to get two adjacent seats for her and G. They cost $230 each - $30 more than the $200 cap they previously agreed on. When J. texted G. to tell her, all G. said was “yikes!”

4
---
G. still hasn't replied in the affirmative, much less thanked J. for her effort. J. is afraid G. might back out. I told J. I'd cover the extra $30, if necessary.

I suggested if G. completely backs out J. should put her on the not-again list. I know this isn't good advice because J's other fear is not being able to do things with G. in the future.

I need to tell J. it is her decision how to handle this stuff, but I'm sticking to the one-friend policy and I'm going to insist J. not do these things for other people on faith. I'm investing my money in this, so I expect solid agreements be made in advance. I that is what's best for all concerned.

There is one more thing. J. and T. are planning to go to a concert next year. There are four people going. They are all going to get in queue. Whoever gets in first is going to buy the tickets for all four. T. said she would give J. her credit card information.

I'll tell J. if all four are trying and J. gets i first she can use our credit card. All will have to agree on the spend limit in advance. All will have

5
---
to agree whether or not to go to aftermarket if unable to get the tickets from Ticketmaster. I will tell J. not to accept T's credit card information  We will save up enough in advance to cover all four tickets (1 for J. and front for the other three). They need to put the money in some sort of holding area in advance. Then whoever buys the tickets can be reimbursed from there. (Cows. Let them go. Don't foist them on J.)

Letting Go of Your Cows
-----------------------
Buddha said to let go of your cows. To be happy you must free yourself. Attachement to your cows (possessions, beliefs..., even this body) is bondage.

One of my cows is the belief that having a bodybuilder physique and being a good fighter will make me happy.

6
---
I had a talk with my boxing partner( OG) a couple of days ago. I was complaining about my various pains and strains. He is a decorated amateur boxer (Golden Gloves, United States silver medalist) I said I should concentrate on boxing. He is willing to train me. It stuck with me.

I've been doing Muay Thai enough that I have my kicks back. I'm going to concentrate on boxing from now on. I can not afford to get busted up, so I'm not going to fight, but I want my training to be as realistic as possible. So, I'm going to commit to it and take full advantage of OG's expertise.

Ok, now that I got that off my chest, let's talk about cows.

I have many. Here is a list of my cows:

. Strength
. Athleticism - especially in combat sports
. Academic achievement
. Philosophical mastery
. Self actualization
. Wealth
. Financial security (big fear of being broke in my later years)
. Social status (including attractiveness)
. Happy family (image ideal of traditional American family)
. Physical security (shelter, safety, food for me and my family)
. Health (especially as I age, I want to die healthy)

There is no need to get rid of these cows. The roots run deep. Enjoy them fully, but do not become attached. They will all be taken in the end. Do not base happiness on them.

Speaking of Cows :)

I told J. if G. does not get back to her soon, she has my permission to give the ticket to anybody she wants, so she has somebody to go to the concert with. Giving up this

7
---
financial cow provided immediate relief to both of us.
It removed our attachment to the money. It opened up options we had not considered previously (simply giving the ticket to somebody). It removed the financial worry about G. backing out. It allowed me to assure J. that, no matter the outcome, I would not be upset.

I told her again that I love her. I hope she got the message I care about her, not the money. I understand her main desire is to have someone her own age to share the concert experience with. I am always available as a fall-back.

Giving up the money concern yielded great results for her. It encouraged her to reach out to G. again. G. Responded almost immediately, by apologizing for the delay, and confirming plans to go to the concert together. This was the

8
---
best possible outcome, because J's roomate is a good friend of G's and J. was concerned that friction with G. over this would creep into her relationship with A.

There is more to this, but suffice to say this was a win. J. is happy, and when J. is happy I am happy. It was also a good learning experience for both of us I learned the power of releasing the cows and J. learned it is ok to gently assert herself. Other people can not read our minds. It is ok to give them gently, not pushy, hints about what we need.

She also got a taste for the dynamics of leadership. She got experience working with others where money is involved. People can bet weird around money issues. It is good to be aware of that when conducting financial affairs.

For example, do not be so quick to front people for things like concert tickets. Make it a financial contract. Be specific about the terms of the arrangement and secure their solid commitment to honor them. People who come up short on this pay in advance from that day forward.

What is a good English word for “skandas”? I am not Tibetan. I do not rad/write Sanskrit. This word (skandas) is too pretentious for me. In my writing

9
---
I'll use the word “aggregates” (combination of senses and perceptions). This also sounds stilted and pretentious. I could also use “heap”, or pieces, or composite, or union, or stew, or hybrid, or mishmash, or patchwork, or fusion, or mix, or self.

The word or phrase should clearly imply the mix of elements that we call self (collection?). None of these elements are solid or permanent. They are each in a perpetual state of flux. Each is part of the constantly changing composit we call “self” or “I”.

Self:
Form
Sensation
Perception
Mental Formation
Consciousness

Diagram this showing these as clouds within a cloud (self).



Clouds are constantly forming and dissolving. When you look at a cloud you can only see a memory. By the time your brain registers it the cloud has changed.

10
---
How to work with negative habits. Habits serve a purpose. Some habits exist to distract us from suffering, even though the habit causes us to suffer. Some of the suffering comes directly effects the habit has on our mind/body.

For example, the effects of excessive alcohol consumption. Or, the effects of anger. Much of the suffering comes from mental formations about self. From guilt. From fear and despair and self-recrimination. (Can I say more on this?)

Attacking habits and problem behaviors head on rarely works. To work with habits we need to calm the mind and seek insight into what the habit is doing for us. What are we trying to distract or protect ourselves from? As we gain insight into the roots of the habits we can work intelligently with them until they are no longer

11
---
needed. While we are working, the habit may continue. It may dissolve more quickly, or mor slowly, depending  on the nature  and complexity of the causes.

While we are untying all the knots we can work with the fear and recrimination arising from the habit. We should do this to relieve the suffering that comes from punishing ourselves. We can remind ourselves that the habit is just our attempt relieve or avoid suffering, and that we are working, through daily practice, with the seeds.

We can assure ourselves that with time and mindful methods we will purify the seeds of the habit, and, as we do that the habit can be retired with love and gratitude for the work it did for us.

This has parallels to the Christian assertion that accepting Jesus washes away sin. By handing our sins to a higher power we find immediate relief

12
---
from our self-inflicted suffering, as we purify ourselves daily and moment by moment. (In the grace of god - according to the Christian ideology)

*Past Deeds*
Similarly, we can “forgive” ourselves for past deeds that torment us. They were born of ignorance, necessity, or both. We can provide immediate relief by viewing them love and compassion, while we purify their residue. They are just mental formations that we continue to cling to. Mental formations should be treated with love and compassion because they exist to protect us. They can be retired with our love and gratitude for their service.

Don't let impermanence stip your form letting the world in. May of us keep love outside the door because we fear loss. Love and loss

(Can expand more on this topic)

13
---
are sides of the same coin.

What if I don't go first? Is it easier for me to work with my own suffering than to attend the suffering of another? I am familiar with the way I operate. People are so unique that all I can do is project when I'm around someone else who's going through something. What I mean is I can't really see them, I filter everything through my own experience, so I read myself into them.

I can't tell them what will work for them even if they want me to. I'm slowly, painfully learning the art of listening, but I'm impatient. If it takes too long for them to work through whatever they are going through I start to panic. I do this because for some reason I feel responsible to make them feel better. I also get bored if they start going in endless circles.

When I panic or get bored, I tend to try to force things. When I get pushy it just makes things worse. I think I suffer more from watching others than I do when I'm the one afflicted. That's probably too generous an assessment, because when I reflect on some of my bad times I doubt I cared more about anybody else.

With that said, I think I have an easier time attending to death of another creature than I have watching it suffer. That is

14
---
why when my pets got to old I had them put down - an act of mercy for them and for me. I feel like I failed Jericho, my second dog. When he got too sick, K. had to do it. Love you K., and I'm sorry to put that burden on you. I like to believe when I get to old and frail I'll have the means to put myself down. One of my nightmares is watching loved ones go through prolonged suffering.

* Where do good and evil come from? *

Good and evil are just another product of dualistic thinking. Moral codes exist only in the discriminative realm of mind. In this realm, opposites define each other. Good and evil are on set of labels mind uses to classify and categorize sensory experience.

Beyond thought, in the realm of direct experience, there is no duality. There is no need to categorize and classify. This realm is indifferent to our specific behaviors. Everything

15
--
in creation is a direct expression of the force of creation. This force is beyond language. The terms good and evil do not apply. There is no directive for us to be “good” and there is no “evil”. We need to wake up from the delusion that we are separate. We need to realize viscerally that we have no choice but to be harmony with all that is. Only the thinking mind see's it any other way.

All of our actions will reflect this. There is no need to conform to any convention. This is the ideal, but there seem to be practical limitations to it. If we stop categorizing some experiences as desirable and others as undesirable, when we stop discriminating, we are free. Is this possible in practice?

Until we awaken, we remain bound to the wheel of cause and effect. The wheel only exists in our mind. Is it possible to live a life of “marvelous accidents”? (Watts, Way of Zen, p. 28)

We create suffering, just like we create everything else. I am very good at creating suffering. I can create it any time, anywhere, from literally nothing. As I was merging onto the freeway this morning I had to accelerate to merge with some big trucks. I cursed the tank truck behind me for going

16
---
too fast.

I noticed myself making a story about the “stupid guy” driving it. Then it occured to me, these thoughts were inflicting suffering; or maybe they were manifestations of suffering, not causes. Then I noticed I was getting down on myself for having these thoughts. (Creating a chain of suffering. I suffer from something, and then I punish myself for suffering.) So, I changed my tone, to speak to myself with gratitude and respect.

Instead of “Dumbass, there you go again!”, I changed it to “Great catch! I see what I'm doing. I'm trying to protect myself.” I display aggression when I feel threatened. Maybe this is primal, or maybe, it is conditioned, or maybe, it is a little of both. In most of these cases, aggression is not needed.

If I drop the story about the “idiot driving the truck”, all that is left is the observation that there is a big thing near me, moving at a high rate of speed and I need to stay out of its way. This boils down to a simple set of mechanical maneuvers. It is not a territorial dispute. I'm not bing infringed upon,

17
---
and there is no need to make up a story about it. I congratulate myself for noticing this, and I'm happy for this new found awareness. It will help me suffer less, and it frees me to spread the love, or to at least not spread hate (to the guy driving the truck who I know absolutely nothing about).

4/10/24
The Christian prescription against making statues or idols was not only to prevent people from worshiping false gods. It's main purpose was to prevent people from obscuring the true god experience with cheap imitations.

Is better to describe what god is not than to fill the page with over simplified ideas of what god is. The “god experience” is beyond words. It is better to approach it by describing what god experience is not. By this process of reduction we are able to strip away useless jabber and approach the non-verbal, unlimited experience of “god-consciousness”. Another way to put it is, we don't want

18
---
to put a poster of god over our window of consciousness, because it will block the light. If we focus on an image of god, we will stop short of full realization, because the image is a product of thought. It must be discarded.

4/10/24
In the bible, Exodus 20:5 talks about punishing the children for the sins of the parents “to the third and fourth generation of those who hate me.” This is colorful language, typical of the old testament.

Many of the verses in this section of the bible (Old Testament) imply god is an external personal force, casting moral judgments on humanity., labeling departures from prescribed conventions as sin. The word, sin, carries stong moral overtones. The end of the verse characterizes the sin of idolatry as hate directed at god.

To play on a previous analogy of the poster on the window, conventional interpretations of this Exodus verse obscure and dehumanize its deeper meaning. It is impossible to know the

19
---
beliefs and motivations of the original authors of any bible verses. Also, we have no way to know how accurate their translations are, or the motivations and biases of those who translated, selected, and compiled them. We have to make our best guess.

We also have to question our interpretation and biases. All we can offer in return is a kinder, more humanistic version that rings true and better fits the age and culture in which we currently live. It is also our intention, wherever we can, to reconcile guidance from other sources such as Hindu, Buddhist, and Taoist readings.

The bible portrays god as some sort of super-human watcher who passes moralistic judgement on human actions and levies consequences bassed on those actions. It also says god is both a field of possibilities and the creator of all things.

In my opinion, this idea of god puts

20
---
too much under one label. From my point of view (see p. 14, Why does god allow evil?) god is the field of possibilities. I liken this to the quantum field described by modern physics. It presents endless possibilities for manifestation. It is not conscious of itself. It is indifferent to the manifestations that arise from it.

Nothing can manifest from the field without an observer. Conscious awareness brings forth from the field.

The forms produced(manifested) by conscious awareness are perceived and labeled by mind. Labels are assigned meaning, and mental formations are generated and evolved by mind (including moral codes and judgements).

So, we have the field of possibilities, which we will label as “god” for purposes of this discussion. We have conscious awareness, causing forms to manifest from

21
---
the field. Mind perceives the forms, and tries to make practical use of them. It does this with mental labels and mental formations.

Mental formations only model reality. Raw perception is filtered, and bias is inherent in the filtering process. Thought obscures reality. Thought is the poster on the window, obscuring the light of reality. Thought is a useful tool, but must be kept in its proper place. Thought cannot comprehend or adequately describe the fullness of what is. Words can describe the poster, not the light.

22
---
It is this that Exodus cautions against. It is this that Exodus refers to as sin. The word sin has strong pejorative moral overtones. It implies we have done something morally wrong in the eyes of a personal, judgmental, punitive god.

An alternative interpretation is that false gods and idol worship are “mistakes” born of ignorance. We needlessly suffer from passing moral judgement on the products of our ignorance (meaning the mental formations that arise from filtered perception?).

The self-inflicted suffering, that comes from these moralistic constructs, detracts from our quality of life. They cause us pain. The pain may discourage us from inquiring more deeply into things, thus preventing us from learning and evolving.

Pasting up

22
---
the poster thought has created separates us from full realization of what is (separation from “god”). We touch other minds (whether they truly exist or not), including those of our offspring, with our beliefs, and thus, pass the ignorance (and separation from “god”) on to succeeding generations. This separation from “god” (where god is the full experience of reality, without all the filtering and moralizing) is the real punishment.

. “God” is the fild of all possibilities
. Consciousness is the watcher (giving rise to manifestations)
. Mind is the interpreter (filtering perceptions and creating mental formations from them)
. Thought is a tool of mind
. Thought filters raw perception
. Thought creates mental formations
. Mental formations are stored as memories
. Mental formations are dynamic. They evolve with new perceptions and our interpretations of them
. Thought may be biased by existing mental formations.
. Mental formations are abstractions. They don't reliably reflect truth.
. Ignorance mistakes mental formations for truth.

24
---
Ignorance feeds suffering, but it is not a “sin” in the pejorative sense. The pejorative interpretations come from moralistic standards and judgements, because thought is dualistic (right/wrong, good/bad, etc...).

“God” (field of all possibilities) and consciousness (pure awareness) are not dualistic. There is no morality in the realms of God (the field) and consciousness (observer). Beyond dualism, there is no distinction between suffering and ecstasy.

7/17/24
Is it possible to become more agile without losing my sense of god-consciousness? I want to stay in this holy state without appearing, or feeling, pretentious. I don't want to pretend to be like I have a shaved head, wear orange robes, and walk around in that dazed, contemplative state. It may be genuine for some, but most of those people look fake to me (Ekart Tolle). I associate it with cult-personality evangelistic posturing. I am no one thing.

25
---
Gospel of Thomas, Saying 22: "When you make the two one, and when you make the inside like the outside and the outside like the inside, and the above like the below, and when you make the male and the female one and the same, so that the male not be male, nor the female, and when you fashion eyes in place of an eye, and a hand in place of a hand, and foot in place of a foot, and a likeness in place of likeness, then you will enter the kingdom."

This is from Gnostic texts as opposed to those of orthodox Christian writings. Gnostic texts are similar to Vedantic texts, with emphasis on escape from the delusion of opposites, and clearly seeing life through a broader spiritual lense.

Orthodox Christianity is built on writings of authoriy figures, including teh apostles to Jesus, and personalities elevated by organized Christian religious beliefs. Orthodox salvation requires only acceptance of the Orthodox Jesus story. It seems designed,

26
---
intentionally or unintentionally to lower the bar for release from fear of punishment, as opposed to attainment of higher knowledge of the human condition, and release from suffering that arises from ignorance. This is not to say orthodox texts are devoid of insight. There is much wisdom to be gleaned from the cononical Bible.

The real issue is one of interpretation. Popular interpretations skip over the surface. They reduce the deeper meaning of the cononical verses to sound bytes, easily digestd by simpler minds (children). This a well known strategy for increasing mass appeal.

Decode Sermon on the Mount, Viniards, Prodical Son, Commmandments, Other Parables. Write in a "western" style. No pious mumbo jumbo.

7/22/24
God isn't a persnality. God is afield of possibilities. God did not "make" us. We are manifestations, arisen from the field. The field

27
---
is not an observer. Consciousness is the real mystery. Consciousness is the observer, giving rise to manifestations. Mind filters, categorizes, and groups perceptions. Mind creates the world of "things". It assigns actions to them. Mind is the "judge". Thought is a tool of mind. Thought cannot exist outside of mind. Thought produces mental constructs. "Suffering" is a mental construct. There can be no suffering beyond thought, beyond dualism.

I am not "this" or "that".

'''
I am the All,
the All came forth from me, and the All
are contained in me. (None ever leave me.)
Cleave a piece of wood, I
am there; lift up the stone, and you will
find Me there.
'''
(Watts, The Book, p. 20)

7/23/24
Life is the ultimate Koan. Koans are designed to stop the mind. They are questions with no logical answer. The idea is for the mind to thrash itself intellectually against the puzzle until

28
---
the rational mind exhasts itself. Continuing in this way, the student, under guidance, seeks to silence thought, leaving space for insight into the true nature of things.

Life is the ultimate koan. We go our whole life, tryihng to figure out how to obtain pleasure and avoid pain. We seek to reach, and dwell, in the bliss of cosmic consciousnetss. Our attempts to make logical sense of it are doomed, because the nature of existance is beyond logic.

In this space, where the logical mind shuts down, and thought becomes silent, it is possible to reach the other shore.

You ARE the guru. Any true guru you approach will know this. They knowall they can do is accompany you on the journey to this realization. They are. NOT a guide. You must be your own guide. You can, and

29
---
ultimately must, cross alone. It is nice to to travel with a friend. You must also be your own friend. A true friend loves you, in spite of your ignorance and confusion. Nobody loves you more than your guru. The guru is always there to speak with at any time.

The union of lovers embodies the creative principle. See this in each person you meet. We are ALL children of this. See this and have compassion for everyone ou meet, in spite of ignorance and confusion. Do not descecrate this union.

In this way, love even your enemies. Do what you have to in any given situation, but always guard compassion for self and others. When we lose compassion we descend into hell.. Better to lose this physical life than allow compassion to die.

7/24/24
I AM NOT what I was. I AM NOT what you think. What you think

30
---
I am IS NOT. I AM NOT what you remember. Memory is thought. I am ever-changing. The Self is beyond thought. Mind, thought, can only hold an image. The image obscures the light. I AM NOT what your worship. I AM NOT what yoyur revile. Do not bow to false gods, images. Do not bow to an image and call it Self. While the image remains, light is obscured.

Remove the image. Stand in the light, where you can see. Behind the masks of this life-play, there is no distance between us. No separation. Come home.

'''
I AM NOT what I was,
I AM NOT what you think,
I AM NOT what you remember,
I was not that, even then,
Self is beyond thought,
Thought creates an image,
The image is not the thing,
The image obscures the light,
We cannot see in the dark,
I AM NOT what you worship,
I AM NOT what you revile,
Do not bow to image, and call it Self,
Stand in the light,
See beyone the myriad masks,
There is no distance, between us,
No separation,
You are already home,
You are not alone.

31
---
