Notebook 1 
*************

1
---

Bible Thumped

When I was in college I took a class titled Philosophy Of Religion. Of the all  or the courses I've taken this was the most valuable. It opened my perspective on a lot of questions and fears that had been bugging me since my childhood, Baptist, upbringing.

I learned in Sunday-school that I was fundamentally bad and needed to be saved. I never really believed it, but the Baptist version of hell is pretty scary, so I went through the motions of accepting Jesus and getting baptized. I yearned for the Christian version of God to be real. (Maybe God is real, just not the Baptist Sunday school version)

The college course armed me with some good questions. Pondering these helped me back off a little from my fear of the Baptist version of hell and thought of God as the big loving, judgmental, vengeful daddy.



2
---

My intellect overpowered my attempts to have faith. I struggled to reconcile the two, but I know now that is impossible for me. It is possible to a certain extent, but I am convinced now God, if existing, is beyond intellect. I envy the “true believers” (Eric Hoffer, The True Believer, 1951) because nothing penetrates their faith. (What differentiates a true believer from a fully realized being?)

College was a social disappointment. I thought I would find intelligent, philosophical discourse there. What I found instead was people absorbed in the task of getting their credentials (suffering, including me). At least that's was my impression at the time. My daughter is in college now, so I have more perspective. 

It is normal at this young stage of life to be absorbed in getting up to speed for adult life. There are also people who are going through career change. Socialization is not their highest priority.

There seemed to be no premium placed on relationships - at least not the type I had  imagined. Even in my philosophy class people seemed more focused on filling their humanities requirement than on interacting with others.

Maybe I'm exaggerating a bit. I did meet a few good people. I was an avid chess

3
---

player. I spent most of my spare time in the student union, looking for a chess game. I met a few good people there. I spent the rest of the tie studying or sitting around campus, trying to relax between classes, hoping to make some friends. From time to time people approached me.

I soon learned that anybody who did this had some agenda. Most turned out to be soldiers for the lord. After the first couple of interactions I was able to identify them early in the conversation.

4
----

I enjoy discussing philosophy. The first few times I enjoyed torturing these religious recruiters with questions about the god paradox. The conversation usually went something like this:

(Kind of arrogant of me. I missed opportunities for deeper inquiry.)

"Is god all-knowing and all powerful?"

"Yes"

"Does God love us?"

"Yes"

"Then why does God allow so much innocent suffering?"
(I recently answered this. Go dig that up.)

"God works in mysterious ways."

"Well how can allowing an innocent baby to starve to death serve any purpose?"

"Everything is part of God's plan."

"So then, we can't explain it logically? We

5
---

just have to accept it?"

"Yes"

"Well I can't accept that."

"Well maybe it is so we know the difference between good and evil."

"Why doesn't God tell us? Why all the pain?"

"Only God can know."

"So, we are back to faith again?l We just have to take it on faith that God is all-knowing, all-powerful, and loves us, but, for some reason we don't understand, he puts the world through tremendous suffering?"

"Well, God gave us free will."

"If he is all powerful and he loves us, what possible reason could he have to allow the atrocities that take place?"

6
---

Usually, by this time, the other person would realize I wasn't going to let up. They would get that look in their eyes like they were trying to think of a polite way to make their exit. I learned to make it easy for them:

"So, it all just boils down to faith I guess?"

"Yes. That's right. Faith."

Usually, as they uttered this, the sound of their breath reminded me of air escaping a deflating balloon. Other times they put on a brave face. I'm sure sometimes they just felt sorry for me because they had failed to save me from eternal, burning torture at the hands of the highest angel of our loving God.

7
---

What Is Wrong With Now?

Walking. Cool night and clear skies. The wafting smell of mist from the golf course sprinklers. Nightbird songs. Solitude. Time to be alone and enjoy the present.

For some reason, the mind drifts. Always busy with something. Some other place. Past or future. Always trying to entertain or comfort itself.

At first it seems mind is most often preoccupied with pleasure. Going deeper, it seems pleasant thoughts, planning and visualizing are used as distractions (painful thoughts too) to avoid anxiety and depression. Mind is uncomfortable with the simple, silent now Fear of daemons.

It seems a good idea to create

8
---

spaces for various interests and train the mind to keep those interests in their respective spaces. Leave room for daydreaming about the selected activity in its place. Don't let spaces bleed into other spaces. Within any given space broad awareness may keep the mind from drifting into other spaces. Concentration without loss of awareness.

Time to get ready for bed.

9
---

Exercise Space

Any space can be a writing space.

At the gym now. No workout today. Rest. Waiting on Vince to finish his workout (from when we were at Fit Republic, before the pandemic, before the long high-school hiatus) then coffee and weigh-in at Nutrishop.

Been thinking about changing things up a bit. Worked pretty hard trying to reduce body-fat and build muscle for eight weeks. Workout partner (Adam) was preparing for a contest. He weighed in last week. He got second place. Since then we aren't as focused.

I'm thinking to do class four or five times a week, add in whatever lifting I want - flipping tires, farmer carries, calves, forearms, etc... Try to work out outside. Get some sun on my skin.

10
---

Going to take more rest time. Vary lifting intensity and load. Rest after heavy days.

Eat clean and not too much (key to body-fat reduction). Be active during off times. (also helps)

This is already too much and too complicated. How about class five days a week and lift heavy in the class? Limit time in the gym to 1.5 hours.

Leave space for other interests.

11
---

Change Up

Made some space. Built an awesome gaming machine for J. Taking more days off from the gym. Cutting gym sessions shorter. Don't need to live there to get results. Spending more time with J. - working on the computer and playing games. Been thinking about taking math classes. Attracted to the psychological purity of mathematics and mathematical logic. Fearing the study of philosophy would turn me into a parrot. Not a good student.

Death Is A Fact

This sunk in for me this morining. Too much of life is spent denying mortality. Most people do. It causes a lot of suffering. Fear of unbecoming drives a lot of philosophical and religious ideas. One reason for avoiding study of philosophy and religion is fear

12
---

of becoming a parrot. 

Philosophy and religion evolved out of the search for answers, the desire to make sense of the world, to account for suffering and figure out how to suffer less. Brain is designed to move the body through the world. Designed to maintain the body and protect it. Brain tries to eliminate variables. It tries to anticipate and control. In the grand scheme there may not be any answers that will satisfy the brain. There may be no comprehensible order. There may be no order at all.

Maybe these studies would be more enjoyable if approached from a different angle. It seems either someone thinks they are onto something or they discard everything (what do I mean by this?). Those who try to reconcile the ideas of other people operate on the premiss someone is right or maybe many people have part of the picture and it is a matter of piecing together the puzzle.

Who is to make the judgements about how what is right and how things go together? What original thinking do these people offer? Is it possible to have an original thought. If there is an original though, how does one differentiate it from memories and conditioning (2019)? How close can thought come to the truth of things?

13
---

It could take the rest of my life to decide what I really believe, so why read? Reading stimulates contemplation. I don't have to believe. What is the value of contemplation? Maybe reading will make me a better writer? To get back on track, let me restate my original thought, "Death is a fact.

On the tail of that thought comes another, apparently disturbing to others, but which I now find comforting. Nobody who is alive can know what happens after we die. (There it was, back in 2019. I'm still writing on the same topic in 2025. Who am I. Salt man.)

The questions about where we come from and where we go after we die has been a plague on human thought. It has spawned so many charlatans.  Organized religion has spawned so many of them. They come in myriad forms and disguises. To me, religion is any

14
---

organization around having the answer to the mystery of birth and death.  Catholic, Protestant, Mormon, Islam, Hindu, Buddhist, Jim Jones, Reverend Sun Moon, Osho, Jimmy Swagart, Al Quida, Islamic State, Orthodox Judaism - I hate them all for their influence on the human condition and for the lives they've taken. They all leverage the innate insecurities of the human condition to control the weak-minded and desperate

I'm one of these. When things are going ok I talk tough, but there have been times I have cast my rational mind aside and looked to god for comfort (reminds me of that scene in Oh Brother Where Art Thou? Where they are about to be hung and the intellectual guy starts praying. Then when they get out of their fix he explains it away.)  Hey, wait a minute! I said I hate organized religion. I didn't say I don't believe in god.

I think people are starting to catch on that god isn't some superhuman you can talk to and bargain with. Having said this I admit that in times of duress I still talk to him. I look for the god experience in my meditations. Maybe I'm just talking to the part of my brain that controls my endocrine system, when I need it to secrete feel-good hormones.

15
---

I need some of those right now because I have to drive my family to Tahoe for the next three days for family "vacation". I don't understand why people think going out of town (somewhere other than where they are) will make them happier.

Been at Tahoe for a couple of days. ot too bad. Going home tomorrow. They have Fit Republic gym here. I took a class there yesterday. Seems to help my mood. I might go do shoulders later, but I want to write first.

I'm at a new coffee shop, Clyde's Coffee. It is down the hill from Worldmark. It is nice that there aren't so many tourists here. They all go to the Starbucks on the casino strip. South casinos used to be ok, but there are way too many tourists there now - year round. I don't like Clyde's espresso so much, but I like the setting. I

'm sitting outside on the wood deck at a nice picnic-style table, under an umbrella. It is a sunny, cool morning. I like the smell of the mountain air. There are cars coming down the hill from the resorts. The sound kind of like listening to water. It blends with the sound of people chatting over breakfast. 

Ok. Enough small talk. I am getting bored. I considered writing more to describe the environment here

16
---

It would probably be good practice. I don't feel my writing is very colorful - partly because I do not have the vocabulary and partly because I am not inspired at the moment. I will just pause here and see what comes up. 

17
---
(Redacted)

... Also reading

18
---

Joseph Campbell's Masks of God Series (Wow, way back in 2015 and I'm still thinking about reading it. Just bought  the paperback version of the first volume, Primitive Mythology, and read through the introduction. It is so dense I had to take a break. I don't know if my interest will hold. I enjoy reading Buddhist and Vedanta texts more. Not following them religiously. When you strip away the religious overtones the message is very practical. I suppose the same can be said of many of the "religious" texts. Many people attribute wisdom to supernatural sources.

I wonder how much any of us can know about the unconscious motifs driving our behavior and if there is anything that can or should be done about them. They are not the enemy. I should be kind to myself and look deeply. Have I been struggling  my whole life with forces I can't identify, much less control?

I have a new addition to my organized-religion-as-bullshit" rant. Sakyong Mipham Rinpoche used to be the lineage holder of Shambhala "spiritual community". In 2018 he was accused of sexual assault. Further investigations revealed a culture of abuse that traced back to his father, Chogyam Rinpoche. I laughed out loud when I read this. 

I have images of all those people camping out in the mud to see him and all the other "new age" speakers at the Shambhala events that took place in New Mexico and Colorado. This is just additional confirmation for me of what my gut tells me about how lots of people are willing to give up their objectivity and surrender their lives to anybody willing to play the part of "savior".

I feel like a downer saying

19
---
this, but most people who put themselves up as preachers, gurus, or teachers are fakes. People who follow them are stupid. All of this fakery and willingness to be taken in is part of the human conditions. It is just more suffering coming from our desire to be other than humans suffering from moralistic orientation. We should just live free and keep a sense of humor about our human imperfections. We need to drop all notions of perfection as a destination (contemplate instead the notion of non-attainment). Even at my advanced age I am too concerned about what other people think of me. It is stupid and limiting.

20
---

Redacted

21
---

(Redacted)

I feel like I've wasted my life. I want to cry. I remember the 7-8 year old me, standing on the street in front of his house, promising himself he was not going to live like his parents - always fighting with each other. Here I am, 60 years or so later, married to a woman who seems to hate me. I feel like like I've wasted over two-decades of marriage and, at my age, I won't get another

22
---

shot. (Since I wrote this my thinking has evolved. There is more to love than the romantic version. As Kahlil Gibran so eloquently describes in The Prophet, love can break you, and that's ok.)

Then said Almitra, Speak to us of Love.

     And he raised his head and looked upon

the people, and there fell a stillness upon

them. And with a great voice he said:

     When love beckons to you, follow him,

     Though his ways are hard and steep.

     And when his wings enfold you yield to

him,

     Though the sword hidden among his

pinions may wound you.

     And when he speaks to you believe in

him,

     Though his voice may shatter your dreams

as the north wind lays waste the garden.

     For even as love crowns you so shall he

crucify you. Even as he is for your growth

so is he for your pruning.

     Even as he ascends to your height and

caresses your tenderest branches that quiver

in the sun,

     So shall he descend to your roots and

shake them in their clinging to the earth.

     Like sheaves of corn he gathers you unto

himself.

     He threshes you to make you naked.

     He sifts you to free you from your husks.

     He grinds you to whiteness.

     He kneads you until you are pliant;

     And then he assigns you to his sacred

fire, that you may become sacred bread for

God’s sacred feast.

     All these things shall love do unto you

that you may know the secrets of your

heart, and in that knowledge become a

fragment of Life’s heart.

     But if in your fear you would seek only

love’s peace and love’s pleasure,

     Then it is better for you that you cover

your nakedness and pass out of love’s

threshing-floor,

     Into the season-less world where you

shall laugh, but not all of your laughter,

and weep, but not all of your tears.

     Love gives naught but itself and takes

naught but from itself.

     Love possesses not nor would it be

possessed;

     For love is sufficient unto love.

     When you love you should not say,

“God is in my heart,” but rather, “I am

in the heart of God.”

     And think not you can direct the course

of love, for love, if it finds you worthy,

directs your course.

     Love has no other desire but to fulfil

itself.

     But if you love and must needs have

desires, let these be your desires:

     To melt and be like a running brook

that sings its melody to the night.

     To know the pain of too much tenderness.

     To be wounded by your own under-

standing of love;

     And to bleed willingly and joyfully.

     To wake at dawn with a winged heart

and give thanks for another day of loving;

     To rest at the noon hour and meditate

love’s ecstasy;

     To return home at eventide with gratitude;

     And then to sleep with a prayer for the

beloved in your heart and a song of praise

upon your lips.



I no longer believe the mythology of "romantic love for life". Some lucky people may find it, but most of us won't. Most people are conditioned by society to marry, but the interest of society is in propagating itself - even at the expense of the individual. Some people are lucky. They really like/love each other, and both are happy in the socio-economic institution of marriage. 

I don't think those people need to get married. They just do it to be "respectable". Either way, they are happy with each other. Others are just stuck, legally and morally. (This is very negative. My perspective has changed since 2019. There is more to love than "happy, happy, joy, joy. Love is a journey. Enduring marriages depend on something deeper than happy, happy, joy, joy.)

23
---

Maybe when one partner dies the core experience for the survivor will be momentary sadness over losing something so familiar. This sadness may be mixed with a sense of relief and hope for a better future - free from the burden of obligation. What a waste! I want to cry.

I'm in a better mood today. Words from Joseph Campbell (Masks of God, Vol. 1) in my head put a different light o my previous comments (see above). This may just be a trivial fancy, but the above all be taken as just another act in the play of life. Even if people think and feel the way I said, where is the tragedy? Couldn't all this self-important strutting be part of a divine comedy?

When I say divine it doesn't mean I believe in an anthropomorphic god. Campbell's writings inspire me to seek the bottom of the ocean.

24
---

If that (unconscious) is the source of so many of our drives, why don't we go there and learn the landscape?

I don't think we avoid it out of pure laziness. Fear holds us back. There is fear of what we will find or become. Maybe we are afraid we will disappear? Maybe we fear our own judgement? I regret many things I consciously remember. How deep is it? 

Is digging into the unconsciousness another mythological right of passage, couched in the belief that if we die to our conscious construction of self we will be reborn (physically or metaphysically) into something better? Does the thought of afterlife (I wrote about this elsewhere) sill linger there - the belief that our purpose in this life is to elevate our consciousness in preparation for the next? (Mind is not the enemy. Look gently, with love and compassion and it will reveal itself. See writings on habits and regret in some of my other notebooks.)

25
---

Joseph Campbell sheds some light on this in his discussion about the mythologies of the cannibalistic guardian at the gate to the afterlife. To get past this guardian the soul must complete a maze test, lest the guardian devour it. Many mythologies have a version of this and engage in rituals to prepare us in advance for this test.

Heaven and hell seem to go back to earliest infantile experience. On the one hand there is the experience of unity with the mother's body - heaven - in the womb and at the mother's breast. On the other hand there is the terror experienced as the the infant's consciousness of separate self emerges - the hell experienced as the original infant's earlier universe is torn apart.

The mother is then perceived as both the madonna body and the cannibal. The womb as heaven, and the vagina as the passage to life outside the body which tears the womb experience apart. The emerging sense of separate self ushers in dualistic thought - good and bad, pleasure and pain, ecstasy and suffering. 

26
---
Is this where our night-terrors come from - constant underlying sense of malaise? Is it the infantile perception of mother-as-cannibal that gives rise to the idea of the toothed vagina? I have to re-read that section. Is this idea particular to males? (I don't think so.) Might the teeth include the sense of obligation and servitude embodied associated with mothers and children?

With marriage and children come with a strong sense of obligation. A man's life takes a dramatic turn. He is no longer able to roam the world as a lone-wolf. The obligations of marriage and fatherhood tear away at the ego. Interaction with a woman's vagina brings forth the child. 

Ironically, man's attempt to return to the womb through sexual intercourse brings him again in contact with teeth that tear his old world apart. Many men choose this unconsciously in an attempt to escape the oppression of ego. (Learning to live for others (sacrifice) frees us from clinging to the concept of individual self.) At some unconscious level he understands in order to make a new, better world he has to let go of the old one.

27
---
During caveman days (Stone Age - Particularly Old Stone Age and Middle Stone Age) having a family increased male mortality risk because resources were scarce and males had to protect their families. It was harder to feed a family than an individual. If attacked from without, either by natural forces or by other humans a man with a family was less likely to flee a losing situation. 

He was forced to stand and fight to protect his family. Over the millions of years of old and middle stone age this reality may have become an archetypal inheritance symbolize by the toothed vagina. 

The desire to return to the source bubbles up from time to time in me The first time I really noticed it was in college. All the ambitions and optimistic arguments I had previously relied on no longer worked. It was a crisis because something deep inside me wanted to just leave “this world”. Thinking about it now, it was probably there from much earlier in my life. My memories are rife with adversity. 

At the time, I interpreted this “desire to leave” physically. Now I interpret it more broadly. I can also be interpreted as the desire to die to the tyranny of the mind. This is based on the idea that the mind is an adversary. Instead, treat mind as an ally. Show yourself compassion.

28
---
The experience in college was my first real existential crisis. I felt panic. I had to come up with some reason to go on, but every reason rang hollow. I finally settled on the idea that I would stick around and make things better. I finished school and have pursued this idea ever since.

I got a high-paying job, got married, found my daughter, and got free of most of my bad habits. I very rarely drink, I don't smoke, and my only recreational drug is coffee. I'm in financially comfortable retirement now and yet that hole remains in me. My desire life ebbs and flows.

Some days the thing most keeping me here is my love and sense of obligation to my daughter. I'm very depressed over my marriage. I've given up hope or even the desire to reconcile

29
---
with my wife. 


I believe I had a premonition about my wife in a long before I met (chose) her. She is the biting woman from my younger dreams. She is what Campbell calls the “phallic female”. She has serious penis envy (obsessive need for control). I've decided she can't have mine, so we are in for more battles. 

It goes deep with her, so I don't expect we will ever get completely past it. (Since I originally wrote this the water has settled a lot. We have flare-ups, but not as intense or prolonged as they used to be. I'm able to look through a more compassionate lens now. I find love there.)

I've wished and tried so hard for a “normal” life, but it seems I've always been at war. My family life was a war-zone when I was young. My mother and father had violent arguments and I didn't like my sisters. (I was first born and male.) Outside was no better. My experience with other kids was that they were just mean and selfish. Come to think of it, I feel that way now about most adults.


I'm in a bind because I want to have loving relations with other people, but my projection is everyone is just out for themselves. Am I that way? 

If so, what's the use of continuing?
 

30
---
For now I'll just work with my mind and continue to slog through. I'll be physically dead soon enough. That isn't the end of my karma.

Do all roads of the mind lead to the same place? Can I voluntarily put myself into a mental state that leads to insights? Is that a form of meditation? Yes. I think so.

31
---
Redacted (Empty meandering about the gym and stuff)

Can I put myself in the mood

32
---
to write? The way to get in the mood to write is the same as for everything else, just start. Start wherever you want. Start wherever you can bring yourself to start. It might be helpful to set aside a time and place for it. You aren't restricted to that time and place. You can write any time and just about anywhere. 

Write while you are trying to get in the mood to write. Write drivel if that's all you have. Usually even a bad writing session bubbles up at least one good idea. Just give yourself an hour or so. Even if that's all you do it adds up day after day. Reading also puts me in the mood to write. I read from whatever book inspires me or I read back through my own stuff. As I read I usually find stuff I want to expand on. Then I start writing about it. 

I need a new car (2019). The car sounds and feels old now. 

I'm going to J's high school orientation tomorrow. It forces her to think about the move toward adulthood.  One of the things it brings up for her is my death. The idea of a world without her daddy is probably pretty scary. It is very depressing to her. I think this is a right of passage for all young people. It has been since the beginning of human existance. There are myriad right-of-passage rituals to help young people through it.

34
---
Somebody mentioned to me once that it seemed to them I had no confidence to face life without my dad. I see that now in J. I think maybe it's harder for girls. I see a ray of hope. Talking with her the other night I got the impression she is tougher than I previously thought.

35
---
I am a little less worried that she needs my protection. It sounds like she can be a little mean and pushy. We need some of that toughness in this world. The trick is to be tough without being mean. I have to be careful what I say to J because I grew up with a lot of meanness inside me. I guess still pissed off about being bullied, even though I probably brought a lot of it on myself.

Fuck the new-age mystical bullshit idea that we should passively accept everything. That's just my take on shit I read somewhere, or heard (selective perception) from new-age gurus.  

Kates dad just walked up and gave me that salesman handshake and made some superficial smalltalk - the kind of talk that you use to fill space as you have one foot out the door. He mentioned how we will “catch up sometime” - like he ever stops running.

36
---
I'm not sure why he even said hello. I'm tempted to go into a rant about how worthless this guy and his family are, but let's not waste time on that. They are not our friends. Let's just leave it at that. I don't think I need to be polite next time we meet. My time is too valuable to waste on people who offer nothing back.

By “waste time” I don't just mean interacting with them. I mean even thinking about them is a waste of time. For that matter what is the use of going over anything from the past unless it gives me some sort of pleasure or helps move forward. I probably should stay out of the psychological realm. 

Why don't I make philosophy my mythology. Build a personal mythology around philosophy. Perhaps exploring philosophy to its end will

37
---
bring me to a state where it all falls away and I am left with my essence. Martial arts and study of Eastern philosophies was supposed to do that for me. I may be approaching that with the mythology of bodybuilding. I've transcended the muscle myth (the idea that bigger is better and that more muscle is healthier). Now I am more relaxed about it. I just want to stay healthy. I think reaching this shore brought some depression with it though. Now I see it is empty.

Perhaps the journey was the important thing. My life is like this now. All pursuits are ultimately empty. I don't expect an audience with god. It seems others have said, “it can only be described by exclusion of everything else. It cannot be perceived directly, or, if it can, it cannot be remembered (it is beyond mind) and even if we could remember it, a memory is only an approximation. There is no language for it. It is beyond thought.

38
---
I noticed yesterday how I watch myself. I'm always posing - even when there is nobody around. Maybe all I want is to be free of the watcher. In No Exit, Sartre's character,Garcin, declares “hell is other people”. I don't know what Sartre meant. When I first read it I assumed it was talking about how we worry what others think of us. We worry that others are watching and judging. 

Now, I believe we carry this torment with us. We are the watcher. We are always evaluating and judging ourselves (self-awareness and mind). I think

39
---
we all carry around this internal critic. Consciousness is aware. We receive stimulus from our sense organs. This is at the physical level. These stimuli are further filtered, labeled in the process of perception. The perceptions are the foundation of mental formations. Mental formation is where evaluation and judgements are made. There is no escape from this. It is a function of the brain.

What can be different is how we respond to all of this. Many of us are afraid of our critical mind. With training we can develop our ability to observe these processes objectively, and adopt the mind as an ally. Where the sense of play abounds these thoughts-become-actions my take on a light entertaining character.

Some people see light in everything. They don't take themselves, or anyone else, too seriously. They don't walk around in constant fear. They are open to explore and expand (free) because they aren't compulsive about control. This outlook can be cultivated. We can train ourselves not to take our judgmental thoughts too seriously.

American culture is puritanical. Most Christians believe they are guilty of original sin. Sartre's watcher is in full effect here. Watching. Judging. It is a smothering influence. How can people be free under this cloud? If you act “too” happy people try to drag you down (leveling).

40
---
The image ideal is to be special and wait to be discovered, like a wallflower at the school dance. However, leveling mechanisms don't work on truly happy people. How to become one of them?

It isn't like they  are bucking the culture (maybe that is a valid approach though). Maybe they just can't help themselves. They are wired that way? Are we chasing unicorns here? Hmmm... Now I don't feel like working out. Maybe my true nature (I have no nature) is that of a hedonistic intellectual. 

I wish I could just be that (I can't. It isn't my nature.) - pouring myself into intellectual pursuits with no care or thought of the future, or at least fully believing in the path of pure intellect (Stephen Hawking had no choice.). The body is going to betray me eventually. Why give it so much  say in day-to-day  affairs? I need to give it enough to support the intellectual, social enterprise. If I don't work out for more than a few days I feel


41
---
like shit.

Worked out yesterday. I feel better today. Slept well last night. Don't want to go to the gym today. I'm at Starbucks, drinking espresso and having some oatmeal. This is the best part of the day. (I'm keeping this stuff because it could be a character narrative.) 

I am alert and energetic. I'm comfortable in my own body. Starbucks isn't too busy - yet. It is nice and cool in here. I have plenty of table space and the light is good. Things are clean, neat, and orderly. There are people so I don't feel so lonely. I don't need to talk to any of them. 

Breakfast and this triple espresso are my favorite experience. I'm not bogged ddown from eating all day. I'm not spaced out yet by the vassal constriction caffein causes, so I can enjoy the stimulation without the downside.

Wow, little drops of sunshine come into your life when you least

42
---
expect them. A young lady just complimented me. She thinks my handwriting is pretty.

I remember in second grade, Wichita Falls, Texas, I got A's in every subject on my report card except one, handwriting. Since that day I've considered it ugly. I fear if people judge me by it, they will think me uneducated and unintelligent. I wonder how deep and wide the impact has been on my self image and behavior.

Reflecting on this my mind meandered to contemplation of short-man's complex. Probably some good material there. It came off of contemplating why I underachieved in school. Going deeper I could ask what it had to do with my arrested emotional development. I was so depressed, shamed, fearful all the time. I couldn't imagine why any girl would want me. I wish I hadn't been so fucked up. (I am here for you now.)

(Note: There was an element of truth to my perceptions. A lot of women make a big deal of height - based on conversations I've had with my daughter about what she and her friends look for in a man. However, not all women are like that. I had some beautiful girlfriends. I just didn't believe in myself at the time. I still think women prefer tall men, but I don't care any more because I'm already married and old. I wish I'd understood then that the key to finding kindred spirits is to just be humble and be yourself.)

43
---
Cherisa Tillis liked me. I still love her even though we never dated. More accurately, I love the image I've created of what could have been. I had many sweet, beautiful girlfriends, but was too addled by my immaturity  to appreciate them. I wonder where Sharron Ellis is now (Nick found her on facebook. Still married to Neils brother.) Michelle too. Both of them deserve the best.

I wish better for me too. Almost daily I question why I am still marred (2019). Why  don't I split and enjoy what is left of my heretofore miserable life. (Wallowing in self-pity helps me avoid responsibility. It's weak-minded.)


44
---
Or, why don't I stay and enjoy it anyway. I need not honor any constraints others try to put on me. I thought by now I would give up worrying about the future. When S starts nagging I just walk out now. I shouldn't have to, but the alternative is I stay and fight. I tried that for a while and learned that some people just need to fight. I'm not one of them. 

If I had my own place I wouldn't have to leave to have peace and quiet. I guess I am domesticated,, like a neutered pet. I also feel obligated to stay the course (2019) for at least a few more years for the sake of J. (Thinks are different now, in 2025. J is no longer such a strong anchor. The courts can't tell her who to live with now. Her personal power is expanding too, so she doesn't take shit from S any more. In a few years J will be truly independent and I can let the monster out when S asks for it.)

Is it really nobler to subjugate my desires, even up to death, for the sake of anybody else? Maybe I fear I will have regrets later if I assert myself now (2019). There seems no place to hide from the tyranny of my mind.

(Note: I'm getting a handle on this. Stop thinking like a victim. Show yourself some compassion. Embrace your power.)

 A notebook a week (nah). I supposeI could do it, but is it helpful to just crank out

45
---
volume? (Not my style. I think a lot and write a little each day. It's part of my Starbucks ritual.) I suppose I could pick the idea apart, or I could just do it for a few weeks to see what happens. I guess it doesn't really matter what I write. I'm still experimenting.

Someone got mad playing Bed-wars today (2019-2020). We all get frustrated when we are constantly being owned by better teams. During the conversation they shomehow found out I'm J's dad. Gotta go now.

I'm a little wrung out from playing bed-wars all day. I tend to get depressed, feeling that I've wasted my time and life is empty. This comes and goes since my college days. There is something better I should do with J. Time is running out (wow, thinking this way 5 years ago and I'm still here in 2025). I wish I could give her more. I wish I could make her bullet-proof.

That chess class (Chess Wizards) is a total waste of time. It has to go. I don't want to break the school (high school?) S.will be mad, but I never

46
---
really wanted to teach this class anyway. I was flattered they wanted me, but I didn't really want an after-school babysitting job. Should I continue to do it to make S. happy? I don't do anything for her. I wish she knew how to recieve.

If I want to increase my word-count I can write about my disappointing marriage again. Maybe I'm not done with that. (2025 has gotten better. I have changed). I'm in need of comfort. I liked the reading this morning, about living in the now. Alan Watts is one of the most comforting writers. I also like Kahlil Gibran's words in The Poet.

I should be happy in this stage of my life. I have always wished to be closer to the end than to the beginning, with money and time to sit and contemplate. I could wish for more money, but I've pretty much arrived. I would like to enjoy it more. Maybe I should dabble in art or music more, and write a lot more. It seems to comfort me. 

I remember a psychologist telling a friend nearing retirement to find a hobby. I remember I sensed some urgency in her voice. Now I've experienced it. I went through a pretty significant period of adjustment for about two years after I retired. I just want

47
---
to escape into the present moment, stop reviewing past and trying to anticipate and control the future.

Programming does that for me (Not any more. Writing and training does it for me now.) I want to write my heart out. If I keep writing, will it all come out? (Yes and no. Mental formations are not permanent.) 

Can writing keep me in the position of the observer, keep me from getting lost in circular thoughts? (Yes. Staying in the present moment keeps me from drifting.) I don't know yet. Do I want to stop thinking so much, or do I just want to stop it from running in circles? I think the answer to both questions is “yes”.

Should I sign up for the gym? J. doesn't want to. What about me though? Can I stay healthy just making stuff up at the college or at home? I suppose I can (I ended up going back to the gym. I get more done there.). Why pay all the gym fees (Crunch only costs $15 a month, so no problem.) 

What about V.? Will he be ok without me? (He hasn't been going in. I told him I'm there, but I guess he doesn't really want to go. It's hard to start back after being gone for a long time.) I should at least message and email him from time to time. I wonder if H. enjoys

48
---
her new job? I wonder if V. is lonely, sad without her around (I doubt it.)? Maybe, at this stage of life he wants to make the most of his time with her (But, she is pretty impossible to be around.)? I think he is sad, like me, not to have the loving relationship he wants with his wife.

I feel like I've given up on that (Still do, but not as bad.). Am I seeing clearly? Am I being fair? I think S. also feels sad. I wish there were something I could do to make things right between us, but here we are again. (Start with yourself. Be love. If you take responsibility for your world you will have fewer enemies. Others may be in conflict with you, but you don't have to be in conflict with them. Open the door to compassion without being a doormat.)

I am not willing to give myself over to the mythology of romantic love any more. I tried.  She could have had me, but she threw my attempts to do the “right” things in my face. She destroyed my faith, and with it my hopes of romantic happy-ever-after died. I'm not sure they can ever be resurrected. Maybe, in doing so, she freed me? (Try simple compassion. Don't dwell on the past. Each moment is new.)

I don't feel angry now, just deeply sad and disappointed I'm not able to bridge the gap, and so will probably never be able to keep the promise I made to my second-grade self. (Don't make her responsible. Rise above pettiness. Have compassion for self and others. Be love. This theme continues to pop up. Don't bind your promise to her. Create your own life.)

49
---
I wonder what personal promises J. made to herself? I should ask how I can help her keep them? (Yes. Listen more.)

I tell J. to concentrate on school and not worry about boys. When I was in second grade I was already thinking about what kind of husband I would be, what kind of marriage I would have. I remember sometimes how much more interested I was in adult stuff than grownups probably gave me credit for.

It makes sense that I would observe  my parents and think about what kind of spouse and parent I would be. I was also sexually aware at a very early age, around four or five, though I didn't understand the mechanics. I don't think a psychologist would be surprised by this. I wonder if others have observed this in themselves. The times I've hinted at it in

50
---
conversations people acted surprised or perhaps they could relate but felt uncomfortable talking about it.

J has told me some stories about grade-school that surprised me. She was more than I thought she was. She experienced and acted out a broader range of emotions than I thought. She was stronger than I thought. Some of that is coming through now.

I like that she is becoming a bit more willful, a bit more demanding in her relationships. Now I just wish balance for her. I want her to be independent, but not lonely and angry. Maybe I'm projecting. I need to give her as much space as I can, as long as I'm there to protect her when she really needs it. She has to have space to make mistakes and learn.

I have to fix this exercise

51
---
thing. I love just sitting around the college cafeteria. (Except I remember now getting very annoyed by the antics of the high school students. I am a little cringed by my internal reactions at the time. I was very stressed, angry, and depressed.) My biceps are going soft. (Prior to J's entry into high school I was hitting the gym regularly and working out hard. During her high school, and the COVID, years I went down hill. I must have written this during her Freshman year.) 

I preach that we have to stay fit to perform optimally in our studies. I should follow my own advice and put in the time I need. I think an hour a day is enough for me. (Now, in 2025, I'm in the gym 2-3 hours a day.) On J's workout days I will just work out with her. On her off days I need to do something additional. It doesn't have to be fancy or take a lot of time, but it has to be enough to keep me in shape.

I also need to up in the gym on Saturdays to spend time with V. I also need to cut down on the sugar. I think this will take the edge off my depression. (For two years after I retired I was chronically depressed.) I was very pleased to hear from V That he is benefiting from his time in the gym. It takes a long time to 

52
---
fill up one of these pages. Trying to fill one of these notebooks a week seems like a lot. It seems I'd have to write almost exclusively to do it. That leaves little time for other activities (I'm currently, 2025, writing regularly and hitting the gym every day, and still getting my other stuff done.) I can, however, spend a lot more time writing. I want to see where it takes me. I should put as much time into studying Philosophy and writing as I put into mathematics and programming. (That's what I'm doing in 2025. I'm interested in AI, but I am mainly interested in what it can do for me, not in programming it.)

My true interest is writing. I also enjoy my time in the gym. I feel better and I have friends there. Writing takes my mind off the other bullshit going on in my head.

53
---
I want to keep up with J in Math and English. (Was thinking to help her. She has far surpassed me now.) I expect to complete Calculus by the time she graduates. (Not happening). I have four years to write my first book. (This was in 2019. It is now 2025. I'm writing, but I don't see a book anytime in the near future - if ever.) There is nothing stopping me. 

I can do anything I want. (I think I was trying to pump myself up here.) I have a lot in me. I don't need to put any more in. I need to let some out. My legacy will be how I lived and treated others, not my intellectual accomplishments.

54
---
The thing that most likely outlives us is what we contributed to others. 

55
---
The best I can do is model. The most important thing is for J to have satifying experiences and build good memories. She needs to build her social network. (She is doing all that.) The social skills she is learning

56
---
will be a most valuable asset for her. I don't want her to be lonely. Friends are important. Just don't give yourself away to get them. Anyone who demands that isn't a friend. Have compassion though. They may have given themselves away.

J and I had a couple of interesting conversations about group identity. J sees it as just an assignment. I see it as much more. I want to continue discussing things like that with her. (Problem is she isn't really interested in talking much about things like this at this time in her life. That frustrates me a little bit.)

Those discussions will help her figure out who she is and what her personal standards are. (Good for me too.) I believe it is important for us to have opinions  as protection against being sucked into unhealthy culture. (Know who we are.)

I should write a paper (for Jordan) outlining what I think about group identity. We all have  our own way of looking at things. Hearing or reading what others think

57
---
can be a catalyst for formation of our own belief systems and personal style. Perhaps my biggest  contribution from doing stuff like this is to inspire J's self-inquiry, not from and of my specific beliefs.

58
---
Math and gaming, math and gaming. It seems to be a mantra right now. I spend my days at the collage. Should I be doing something more? It's funny when I think about my days at the college. Should I be doing something more?

It's funny when I think about my age in years. I still pursue my interests with vigor. Am I supposed to instead give up these pursuits, to trade them in for a life of quiet contemplation? That's what I envisioned when I was younger. My idea then was that up till around 50 years of age or so I'd do the confusion thing - my duty to society and family. Then after that I would allow myself to drop  all that for a life of quiet, philosophical contemplation, meditation, and writing.

It isn't working out that way. I'm well past 50, I'm still raising my daughter, I'm still doing martial arts, I am writing, and I still feel undone. I'm not the serene guru I thought I pictured in my youth. I don't really have a purpose in life now except to help my daughter launch hers. I still practice fighting arts a lot and body-build. I still want to be a bad-ass, but time is not on my side. 

I'm getting older. Eventually this body is going to slow down. I'm not gonna get any taller, or any more attractive, or really any more interesting to other people. Other people don't see me the way I see myself. I think at best I'm just an old item of curiosity to younger people. The most frequent question I get in the gym is “How old are you?”. 

Are all the gray bearded gurus just a bunch of old guys trying to come to terms with the reaper, to reconcile with the end that awaits us all? I think I'm becoming one of them. I think some of them treat enlightenment as a profession. Others, like me, are trying to deny old age and death. I want to be one who has simply accepted what is in front of them. No need to question. Resistance is futile. That is my idea of true enlightenment. (This inquiry can help others if we write about it. Our personal journey is relevant.)

59
---
It is not about obtaining something. It is about allowing it to all come and go. That is what it is going to do anyway. It is only wistful thinking that we can somehow control it. (Help others navigate this.)

This doesn't mean to sit idly by and wait for death. it means to engage as much and in any way that moves us. We can enjoy the play without becoming attached. When we drop attachment we are free to play.

60
---
Redacted 

61
---
Do good boys go to hell?

I was born in Sandia Base hospital in Albuquerque, NM.

(Sandia Base was the principal nuclear weapons installation of the United States Department of Defense from 1946 to 1971. It was located on the southeastern edge of Albuquerque, New Mexico. For 25 years, the top-secret Sandia Base and its subsidiary installation, Manzano Base, carried on the atomic weapons research, development, design, testing, and training commenced by the Manhattan Project during World War II.)

We lived off-base, in a little house in Albuquerque. I went back there 30-35 years ago to see my childhood home. It was a mean place, but I was too young to know, but I remember one of the adversarial encounters a friend and I had with some older kids there. I don't know how much danger we were really in, but this began to color my world view. When I was about five years of age my dad got transferred. 

We shipped out to Germany. Germany was a mean place too. I had some friends later in life who used to also live in Germany. They told me German kids and American kids were always fighting there. That shed some light on many encounters I had living there, though I didn't understand any of the why when I was there. This further developed my adversarial world view.

When we shipped back to the states I brought that toughness with me. I was a sweet, fun-loving kid, but my experience was that you can't really trust anybody and you have to be prepared to fight. I think I got picked on because I was small, though I have no specific memories of that from my younger years, but I think it put a chip on my shoulder. I felt small.


(Finish this and give it to J.) 

High school sucked. That's not the right way to say it. I had a lot of personal problems, so I don't know how much of the suck-ness I brought on myself and how much came from some of the sucky characters I encountered. I know I had a problem with authority. 

I don't know how much of that came from my thinking and world view and how much of it came from my sucky dad. Come to think of it, I don't know how much of my dads sucky-ness came from having a sucky kid.


Thought: The world isn't. It just comes.

62
---
What is the nature of consciousness?

1) One single instance of consciousness that creates a single reality?

2) One single instance of consciousness that creates multiple realities? Hiding itself behind masks and roles in each.

3) Multiple instances of consciousness, unaware of each other and not interacting with each other. Each a single reality or each creating multiple realities (hiding).

4) Multiple instances of consciousness. Each creating one or more realities. Each instance of consciousness interacting with one or more instances of the others.

In each of these cases the phenomenal world may or may not exist.

Will the truth come when thought is silent? We must go to the bottom of the ocean to find out. We may be able to bath in it, but can we

63
---
bring it back to the surface or even remember whether it exists? Will the experience inform our conscious day-to-day thoughts and actions? Will it mitigate our suffering? Will it benefit those around us? If enough of us do it, will it benefit  humanity (assuming there is anything substantial to our conscious reality)? Why return at all? Is there a choice?

Does it matter at all what we do in this miserable life? It might be easier to find peace in the belief that id doesn't. Can we simply reside peacefully without the compulsion to act? Can we do that knowing there is a suffering in the world? 

Or, do we throw ourselves on the alter? Is it possible to find peace in self-sacrifice? Is it possible that sacrifice for others is the path to our salvation Maybe we should do all good things for ourselves so we can offer ourselves to others, and, in so doing, offer ourselves to ourselves? (This sounds like ego-speak to me now. It sounds like it came from bible teachings. Nothing necessarily wrong with that though.)

64
---
We are all inextricably connected. In a sense, we are all one. This is true whether the phenomenal world exists or not. It is true regardless of the nature of consciousness (Is that so?). Unless we can remain at the bottom of the ocean we will be confronted with suffering (We will interpret it as such.)

In the original notebook I postulate the difference between Buddha and Bodhisattva is the Bodhisattva “willingly” returns for the sake of all sentient beings. I go on  to speculate about Bodhisattva nature.

In fact, there is no will involved. There is no choice. The wave is the ocean, but the nature of the wave is to wave. Our nature is to wave, not so sit silently while everything waves around us. We are ocean in the sense that everything is ocean, but we wave because it is our nature to wave. 

If we understand this, it will reflect in the way we manifest and the light of that understanding will illuminate the path (for us and for everyone around us). If we understand, we can be more compassionate toward everyone and everything. We do not have to suffer slings and arrows from the ignorant. We understand they make decisions as best they can. 

We

65
---
can exercise compassion for ourselves and and learn from our mistakes. We can have compassion for all, but we don't have to indulge those who are not ready to advance along the path to realization. We don't let others drag us backward. We keep moving forward, for their sake as well as ours. Sometimes it is best for all if we walk away from those who would pull us down.

About Ego
Attempting to get rid of ego simply strengthens the reality of the feeling. (Watts, The Book, p. 122)

Ego, or the sense of “I” is just a sticky thought/feeling. It is impermanent. Allow it to pass of its own accord, like any other cloud. Let it play our, but don't get lost in it. Like any other role-play, you may from time to time, become immersed, but at the end of the day you always come home. Keep a sense of humor about it.

I still get a kick out of playing the guru. Shaolin Monk

66
---
fantasy. In self-defense, I act like I don't care. (Sounded derogatory to me at the time I wrote it, but it is actually very practical. Stop feeling guilty about it.) If I develop ore compassion, will I act more naturally? Trying to act more naturally is really just being a “genuine fake” (I like this phrase. I am borrowing it from Allan Watts, The Book). Besides, what is “naturally”?

If I feel embarrassed it seems most natural to act embarrassed. It is not natural to try and shove it down, it smells fake. (Maybe it is natural, may be it is not. It may be a natural defense mechanism. In some situations it is safe to show embarrassment. In other situations it isn't.) Why shove down this natural response to feelings in the name of acting “natural”?

Shame (fear of being judged) may be a driver, but not the only one. Sometimes acting is a practical necessity. For example, it is not wise to display fear or weakness to an aggressive animal. It is not wise to openly display sexual attraction in certain social situations. There is a long list of taboos. When in doubt it is probably best to play it cool.

There is a lot of life experience baked into our public persona. If we live in the present we can adapt to new situations and new understanding. It is probably best to stop worrying about it and let it play out. If we stop clinging to our ideas of how things “should” be it is easier to relax into situations.

I remember when my old friend, Rick, and I were

67
---
watching the sun set behind the spruce-lined horizon on our ten-day camping trip in Tahoe National Forest (Desolation Valley). He said, “Wow, look at that.” I scanned the treeline, looking for what he was talking about. When I asked him what he was referring to, he said, with some exasperation, “The whole thing!” With our myopic focus on the illusion of separate ego we miss the beauty of the whole.

I am
I am never not.
I manifest when I want to play
I am the field, looking at itself
The ocean waving to itself

Play spans the whole gamut of light and dark.


I am,
You are,
The ocean waving,
to itself.
And so,
to each other.

Here is another memory bubble from the Tahoe experience. Near death. I was climbing up the face of Horsetail Falls with a sixty-pound backpack on. It was almost vertical, so you had to lean into the face of it. My hand slipped and I began to fall backward, toward the water and boulders thirty or forty feet below. 

I had already surrendered to death when a hand reached down from above, grabbed the top of my backpack frame and pulled me back into the face of the cliff. Saved my life. I remember it to this day and remain forever grateful for this miracle.

How am I still alive? We were all trying to get up that cliff. How did the person above me sense I was in trouble? The risked their life for me.
I am pretty cynical toward human behavior, but this and some other encounters I've had keep me afloat. On a larger scale, why did the universe spare me?

I remember a couple of other near-death experiences I'll write in detail about later:
The time in Texas that I almost got hit by a car as I darted across the street on my bicycle.
The time in Arizona when I almost got hit by a semi-rig, if not for the heroic, self-sacrificing, quick thinking, of the semi-driver.

Oh. On more Desolation Valley experience. We decided to spend the night at the top of Pyramid Peak. The climb was arduous for me. The pack was very heavy for my small self and my new hiking boots were cutting very painfully into my ankles. I learned the next day to simply unlace the top eyelet. 

Anyway, when I finally reached the top I let out a primal scream.

We admired the view as the sun set. Top of the world. In my mind, we were the only ones up there. He-men. Great explorers, trodding land only seen by the rare few, gifted ones who could make the journey.

Then, as night fell three or four other people came clamoring up the side, in the dark. Just a quick trip up from their camp to see the sights. They stayed for a while and socialized with us. Then they climbed back down.

So much for my delusions of grandeur.

68
---
Don't leave the present on the table at Starbucks. When you leave you are still a wave. Live the peace and courage that comes with this knowledge. There really is no returning to the ocean. You are the ocean, waving. 

There is no “this” lifetime and no “that” lifetime, just wave after wave. Losing and finding your “self” over and over. Time is an illusion, based on memory. Eternity is now, in the never-ending present, whether you are manifest or not.

Assume karma is transcendent (Pascal's wager). You can't know for certain if it is, so purify the seeds now. With every act and every thought, help others toward the other shore. ear and anxiety come from attachment to status quo and from attachment to expected results. Release yourself from attachment to the illusion of control. Rejoice in the peace and joy of service. Help others on this path.

Do the consequences of our actions transcend our incarnations? For incarnations that take place during

69
---
this lifetime the answer is “yes”. For incarnations beyond the boundary of this physical lifetime there seems no way to know. If we devote our life to full realization of what we really are, and commune with others on the path, we are doing our best to purify our karma, and so, to find releae in the next “life” (incarnation). If there is no next life we have at least made the most of this one.

Are we each one wave looking at other waves or is it one wave making other waves, or is it one wave imagining other waves, or is it myriad waves making other waves, or is it myriad waves imagining other waves, or is it one wave perceiving other waves, or is it myriad waves perceiving others?

What does it matter what any wave does? Why should a wave feel one way or another about how it acts? Why should it feel one way or another about whether it acts or not? Does action

70
---
have anything to do with wave nature? Is the wave “self”? Not according to Watts (The Book). According to Watts a wave is simply an expression of eternal self (IT). Is not then the nature of the wave an expression of devine (self) will? If the wave then accepts its nature, and acts accordingly, what could be wrong with that? Will this spare the wave suffering?

Would you sacrifice yourself to save somebody else? Would you give your life for another? When taking action, do you have to be right every time? What if you try to help and it makes things worse? If we express divine will, how can we do anything wrong? Life is a forge.

When I was a child we lived under the shadow of “the bomb”, nuclear holocaust (the cold war with the Soviets). We used to do bomb drills like kids now do fire drills. The bomb drills really more resembled modern high-rise earthquake drills. There was nowhere to run, so we just got down underneath our desks and put our heads between our knees.

71
--- 
We would have made very compact little proton shadows had an actual attack occured, and god forbid if you survived the initial blast. Just read Hiroshima. There are much worse things in this life than instant annihilation. If a missile ever comes, tell me where it is going to hit. I want to stand right under it.

When I was in college I went through a period of severe existential depression. I still live with the ghost of it.

Sometimes, when facing unpleasant tasks, it helps to adopt a tough-guy mentality. Then you have to put it away when you are around loved ones. This can be a bind when both are happening at once. it is a bind when a loved one is being unpleasant. It is also a bind when you are dealing with personal problems and other people are bringing their problems to you.

These situations can awaken the ghost o existential anxiety and depression. When this happens, we can reach for the light,

72
---
or give in to the dark. Impermanence goes two ways. We don't want the good things to end, and we wish for the bad things to pass as quickly as possible. In fact, no good or bad thing lasts forever. When we are having a bad time it is best to remember the latter and reach for the light. 

Life takes unpredictable twists and turns. Suffering often brings about positive change, and don't forget, pleasure sometimes holds seeds of pain. Knowing this, we shouldn't attach too much attraction or aversion to either.

A friend of mine recently lost her son. She is in her  mid-seventies. He was in his fifties. The sadness clings to her, a parent who outlives their child. He just dropped dead. Testimony to impermanence. Our hearts are with her.

She may feel alone, but she is not. As I contemplate this I feel the pain of this world. WE are all connected. No-self, no-other. Ocean waves. Tears and laughter. Coming and going. Right now I feel tears.

73
---
My friend, Nick, has covid. He is in his mid-seventies. He is my only, and best, friend, left over from high school. I hope he lives.

Good news. Nick pulled through quickly because he acted quickly to get what he needed to help mitigate the symptoms. Now Val has it, but she is more tolerant or just got a milder case. She is well enough for them to take a trip they've been planning on.

