**************
* Notebook 3 *
**************

1
---
The Noise of the World
I said somewhere in my earlier writings “The noise of the world unsettles the mind.” What world? Didn't I also say the “world” is just a projection of the mind? If the mind creates the world where is the noise coming from? Isn't the noise of the world in truth be the noise of the mind? Are desire and fear just products of a noisy mind?

I said to “use meditation and contemplation to tune out the noise.” That implied the noise was coming from outside. If the noise comes from inside - as a product of mind - do meditation and contemplation work?

I think they do, but it isn't a matter of tuning things “out”. The task is to settle the mind. Concentration meditation is a tool for quieting the mind. As Thich  Nhat Hanh describes it, “In active concentration, the mind dwells on whatever is happening in the present moment, even as it changes.” (The Heart of the Buddha's Teaching, p 105)

He offers this poem:

***
The wind whistles in the bamboo
and the bamboo dances.
When the wind stops,
the bamboo grows still.
***
(Vietnamese Dhyana Master Huong Hai, Ocean Fragrance)

A quiet mind yields better quality, deeper

2
---
contemplation (selective concentration).

Is Contemplation Just Thinking?

Where do thoughts come from? In meditation I once experienced what seemed to be cessation of thought. 

For a brief time there was a profound shift where the buzz subsided and my brain became very quiet. It seems there is normally some sort of white noise permeating it and that just drained off. While in that state I was very aware and able to observe thoughts bubble up from shifts in the inert chemical state of my brain.

In the inert state nothing had meaning. It was at once a great relief fro the monkey mind and let it was existentially disconcerting. It seems the mind/body must  be in a perfect state of equilibrium to maintain this.

3
---
I was only able to maintain this state for five or ten minutes. Once I came up out of it I was unable to get back to it, not even to this day. Thoughts that tried to rise in that state were random, arbitrary. There was no logical pattern connecting them at their origin. It was as if thoughts arise randomly and the logical overlay comes later.

So, what is meaning? What is the point of contemplation? Is there really any value to the products of contemplation? Is the meaning of our life simply our  spontaneous actions? 

If our thoughts arise from this inert brain chemistry is there any objective meaning? During this meditation I tried purposefully to slow everything down. It took some effort to hold still and simply observe. Were the

4
---
thoughts that arose truly random?

Maybe I was just observing neurochemical bubbles arising from the sub-conscious. Is consciousness all-pervasive. What do we mean when we use the words “conscious”, “sub-conscious”, and “un-conscious”?

If we accept that consciousness pervades all, the term “un-conscious” is meaningless, so we will discard it.

If we are bing picky we can also discard the term “sub-conscious” because the term implies there is some realm beneath the conscious realm where the light of consciousness cannot shine.

Understanding this we will continue to use the term to make our writing easier. We will define it as “lower levels” of consciousness.

Ok. Let's nail this down onece and for all so I can continue writing. “Awareness” is all-pervasive. Awareness (The observer?) is beyond thought. Consciousness is bound to thought (the brain?). The terms

5
---
conscious and sub-conscious describe levels of thought. The term unconscious has no practical meaning and no intrinsic value, but it may be used synonymously to mean sub-conscious.

In short, variants of conscious describe levels of thought. Awareness is all pervasive. Thought and mind exist within the domain of awareness.

Now that we're clear about the language let's return to the question of whether contemplation is just thinking. It occurs to me that before I explore this question I should ask what thinking is.

How do thoughts originate? Where does thinking happen? Do we think on the conscious level or is that just where we verbalize thoughts? Do we think on the sub-conscious level, or is it all sensations that are interpreted and verbalized as they bubble up through our brain chemistry? Is this what I observed in my meditation? Does contemplation tap into the sub-conscious?

6
---
If contemplation taps into a non-verbal level of consciousness the line between contemplation and meditation (Active concentration meditation is not thinking, not contemplation. Selective concentration can be used for contemplation. Shamata versus vipasiana) is not so distinct as I first assumed.

Are non-verbal sensations in the sub-conscious products of the brain? Are they limited by chemistry and conditioning. If so, they too are contained within the field of pure awareness.

Is it possible all conscious sensations and verbalizations originate as sub-conscious movements, some of which bubble up through our brain chemistry to then be interpreted and perhaps acted on according to some conscious rule-set?

Can this be a more general definition of “thinking”? It seems this all falls under the umbrella of “contemplation”. Can we then answer our question “Is contemplation just thinking?” with a qualified “yes”. Contemplation is ”thinking” according to the broadest definition of the word.

Who or what does the thinking? 

Nobody and no-thing does the thinking. Perceptions arise from the senses and are filtered, interpreted and labeled. The ten-thousand things of this world are products of mind.

Can we say mind does the “thinking”? What is the nature of mind? Is mind unique to each individual? Is there a such thing a universal mind? Is mind limited to the human domain? 

What is the relationship of mind to awareness? Is there any  relationship? Is mind part of awareness or is it simply a product of the brains's attempt to make sense of sensory input? 

Are we born as a blank slate that is written to as we experience sensory input over the course of our lives? Is “mind” a self-writing program? If so, is this true only on an individual level, or is it also true on a collective level?

Is there a “collective”? Does mind have a base in anything solid? The bias of what has been written so far is that thought is produced in it's conscious and sub-conscious forms by a “brain”. Could this brain and it's host organism not just be another mental projection?

It is not

8
---
possible to assert with any certainty that anything really exists. Without this certainty all attempts to describe existence are mere speculation. (It depends on how you define existence. Existence doesn't necessarily imply anything solid. If our mind projects something onto the canvas that thing could be said to “exist”. To paraphrase Kant - I think therefore it is.)

If it is all speculation what is the use of thinking? What is the value of contemplation? Perhaps the value of thought is that it creates the world.

Is contemplation rooted in fear? Do we hope through contemplation to arrive at a better understanding of the world - whether that world is substantial or merely a projection? Do we believe that this understanding will enable us to navigate more safely through tis real or imagined life? Or, might contemplation be pure awareness observing a straw man of itself?

The former may have some practical application or it may be based in delusion that thinking in any way influences
9
---
the unfolding of events. In the second case it seems contemplation only has value if pure awareness is mutable (don't remember what I meant by “mutable”), otherwise is contemplation not simply a form of play? (Instead of contemplation consider using the term “selective concentration”). From whence does thought arise? From whence even awareness? What even is the point of this inquiry? Perhaps it is just a koan?

I need to use Solipsism in a sentence so I can remember it. I spent some quality time with ChatGBT. I drilled it with questions about Kant's flavor of idealism - Transcendentalism. In Critique of Pure Reason Kant posited the world we experience is a conceptual overlay of the stimuli we receive via our senses. It seems Kant asserts space and time exist only in the mind. he calls the things we perceive in

10
---
this space/time construct “appearances” and asserts appearances are mental constructs, not the things themselves. 

In other words appearances are veils cast in our mind over the actuality of things. He provides what appears to be a circular proof that anything really exists outside the mind. (I have to go back an re-read the proof).

“The body itself is emptiness and emptiness itself is the body” (Upanishads?)

There is a branch of Idealism that rejects the notion that anything exists outside of mind. This branch is Solipsism. According to Solipsism the world  (and everything in it) is a purely subjective projection of consciousness.

When consciousness dies the projector light goes out and the screen (void) goes blank. Nothing passes forward because nothing ever existed outside that consciousness. Well then, from whence and how does consciousness arise and how can it die? It doesn't rise and fall with our body because even this body is a mere projection. 

11
---
This implies consciousness rises and falls spontaneously. What we call “mind” is just another projection. It creates itself. Thoughts arise spontaneously and interdependently and are perceived. Mental formations arise around these perceptions, including the mental formation we label “mind”.

Inquiry into the origins of consciousness and mind takes us beyond thought, again to the bottom of the ocean. The concepts of Transcendentalism and Solipsism are bound by thought and thus of no use there. 

(As I explain in Notebook 4, it is possible the five aggregates arise interdependently. I read someplace else that each element has it's own consciousness.)

According to the Heart Sutra consciousness is one of the aggregates and it too is empty.

The Bodhisattva Avalokita,
while moving in the deep course
of Perfect Understanding,
shed light on the five skandhas and
found them equally empty.

Consciousness is one of the skandhas.

12
---
*Mahayana Buddhism Brings Me Home*

This touches me deeply - “Your light illuminates my light and my light illuminates yours. The light of the precepts are like the light of precious pearls, they illuminate each other.”

Gate gate paragate parasumgate bodhi svaha
Gone, gone, all the way over, gone to the other shore

According to the Heart Sutra even consciousness is empty. What then is the world of ten thousand things?

Is there and observer? Is the observer separate from the world?

The fact that I am sitting here writing implies something exists. If all is emptiness where do these words come from? Who's reading them?

Maybe these questions can't be answered. Maybe this writing is just contemplation. What is the difference between meditation and contemplation? Is art meditation?

13
---
Martial arts at the highest level is pure expression. 

There is a lot of thinking when we are learning a form. We practice the form until we no longer need to think about it. As movements burn into our muscles and nervous system we become free to cultivate and express qualities of energy. In an actual fight we don't really have time to think.

Read The Other Shore by Thich Nhat Hanh, Fragrant Palm leaves {Heart Sutra}

Does it matter whether the nominal (Kant) world exists? If it does can our senses perceive it? (yes, of course we perceive it). Does it matter what subjective reality is based on? In other words, does it matter to our experience whether there is a nominal world or not? 

Does the origin of consciousness matter? In what practical terms? Why should we care? Does knowing the origin of consciousness make any practical difference to our experience of reality? Isn't it good enough to understand the role consciousness plays? Who cares where it comes from? 

14
---
Gate, gate, parasomgate...

Maybe it is possible to know and yet be unable to articulate it. (Salt man) Doesn't insistence on articulations bind experience to the dimension of thought?

If experience is subjective what is karma? The idea our future is somehow bound to our present actions leaves us in a form of servitude. What will happen to my loved ones if I die? How many people endure unimaginable suffering because they fear what comes from an untimely death? How many hang on for the sake of loved ones?
What if karma is just another idea born of subjective experience? What if the world around us is of our own making - illusory? Would we still fear parting for fear that not doing it “right” leads to so undesirable consequence? We can't know if this is true, so we

l5
---
feel obligated to hang in there until the choice is no longer ours.

Maybe we have been conditioned to think of voluntary death as a form of blasphemy? Does it say in the bible that suicide is a sin? According to Wiki Christian Views, suicide will not prevent one from achieving eternal life However, it is considered a sin.  Aren't life and death forms of desire? Is it possible to be indifferent to life an death? Is it possible to be indifferent to suffering?

Alan Watts, “Eastern Wisdom Modern Life”, Aug 18, 2006

If experience is subjective isn't also karma? How does Zen reconcile non-duality with the idea that karma is some sort of balancing mechanism? I believe the anwer is that karma is suffering.

As log as we are caught in dualism we suffer. When we transcend dualism we realize everything is already balanced. Suffering is a product of mind. Things just are. Suffering arises from the discriminatory (dualistic) nature of mind. In mind some things are preferred and some things are shunned. This isn't to say we should be able to just brush off our suffering as not real.

Popular belief is that the universe employs

16
---
karma to maintain balance. 

For example, the popular saying “what goes around comes around” implies that “bad” deeds breed inauspicious futures”. This is the model most of us adhere to in an attempt to support our wish for for universal justice”. “Good” deeds yield good futures and “bad” deeds lead to punishment. 

This simplistic model more suited to the developing minds of children, similar to the the way biblical parables are reduced and fed to kids in Sunday school. It is the model organized religion feeds to the masses to keep them in line.

TA more faithful model of karma is that of “cause and effect”. While not completely accurate (because it implies order) it is not inherently moralistic.

17
---
It asserts that all events and manifestations arise from causes (what was the original cause?). While not inherently dualistic this cause-event model does imply order. It implies the doer has some control.

The desire for control emanates from dualism. We want good things to happen in our lives, but we don't want bad things. Is it possible for human beings to act with no concern (preference) about the effect of those actions on self and other?

Is it possible evenn if we firmly believe our world is purely subjective? Are there no rules even in a purely subjective state of existence? Should we not prefer pleasure over pain. The difference is not always clear.

Maybe it is not just a matter of doing whatever we want and accepting whatever happens to us. Sometimes good things hide behind challenges. Sometimes pain is cloaked in pleasure. The real challenge is to see clearly.

18
---
Maybe life isn't just a series of random events. It may be governed by probabilities.

We can't always know the outcome of a chain of events, but that shouldn't stop us from putting our foot on the scale. Things may not always go our way, but sometimes they will (dualistic thinking?).

We can work to improve our judgement, give our best try, and accept that we won't always get what we desire. We can also understand that though things don't always go the way we want, sometimes they turn out better in ways we didn't expect. Sometimes it is the other way around. It is the latter that can freeze us in place. We may be frozen out of fear of failure, fear of discomfort, or laziness.

Cynicism can be a cover (an excuse) for laziness. We may also turn to cynicism to explain our immobility in the face of fear. The same can be said for spiritual pursuits. Live in “doing” without concern for results.

“Those who are afraid of the sufferings arising fro the discrimination of birth and death (samsara) and seek for nirvana do not know that birth and death and nirvana are not to be

19
---
separated from one another; and seeing all things subject to discrimination have no reality, (they) imagine that nirvana consists in the future annihilation of the senses and their fields.” (Watts, The Way of Zen, p. 61)

“What has never arisen does not have to be annihilated.” (Watts, The Way of Zen, p. 62)

Reference: Prajna Paramita and teachers Nagarjuna and Shankara

Nagarjuna works: madhyamaka Philosophy Mulamadhyamkakarika (Fundamental Versus on the Middle Way)

According to Nagarjuna, understanding the emptiness (sunyata) of phenomena leads to liberation from suffering and attainment of enlightenment (ChatGBT)

Does anything have its own nature? For example, does a flower have its own nature, or is it just a manifestation of sunshine water, minerals and nutrients? Do any of the things that make up the flower have their own

(In Suzuki(3), p. 55 The “fields” of the senses are areas or aspects of the external world...) 

20
---
nature, or are they too manifestations of the things that are necessary for their existence? 

If we continue to inquire in this way can we peal anything back to a self-manifesting phenomenon? Do we create gods and magic to try and answer this? Is this the source of our mythologies? Where do we go when our intellect finds its limits? Do we then find ourselves at the bottom of the ocean? Does the ocean have a bottom? How can we know if our mind cannot comprehend it?

How can we answer the question of what lies beyond death? Having experienced it how can we come back to describe it? Can we say everything is in the manifestation we call flower and yet the flower is empty because it has no intrinsic nature (interdependent arising)? 

Is it truly just a manifestation of the universe that we label and assign a nature to  - like beauty or fragility? Beauty and fragility are dualistic mental constructs (beauty versus ugly, fragile versus durable).

21
---
These dualistic constructs are products of perception and mind's attempt to explain them, but they have no meaning without their opposites. Without their opposites they are empty.

Can the flower even manifest without perception? Who is the perceiver? What perceives? 

Is whatever we name not also a label assigned to an object of perception - holding the universe in itself and yet devoid of individual nature (inherent existence).

Sunyata is the Buddhist concept of emptiness defined as the absence of “inherent existence in all phenomena (ChatGBT). This aligns with the explanation given by Thich Nhat Hanh. It is the answer to the question “Empty of what?”, as discussed above.

All phenomenon - physical, or mental, is a manifestation of the entire universe, yet empty of inherent existence. (comment on mental constructions) This is a point

22
---
of intersection between Nagarjuna and Shankara's model of reality. According to Nagarjuna we see the whole universe in Brahman Phenomena has no inherent existence in either philosophy (metaphysical framework). The main point of departure between these two metaphysical frameworks appears to be belief in god. 

Shankara believes in an ultimate unchanging reality (Brahman). Nagarjuna asserts all phenomena is an impermanent, dependent arising with no inherent existence (no underlying reality, no god).

This may explain why Hindu (Vedic) tradition has created so many gods and Buddhist tradition has none. Both traditions claim many prophets with divine vision.

23
---
According to the Heart Sutra:
“Listen Sariputta, this body itself is emptiness and emptiness itself is this body. This body is not other than emptiness and emptiness is not other than this body (non-duality). The same is true of feelings, perceptions, mental formations, and consciousness.”

Emptiness in Buddhist philosophy does not imply non-existence, but rather the lack of inherent, fixed identity. Rather, all things manifest as dependent arising.

The very nature of emptiness is manifest within the physical body.

According to current science physical objects, like our body are made of countless particles, like molecules, atoms and so on, each of which can be decomposed into countless others. All of this is constantly moving, spinning, and changing.

In this way nothing is solid or permanent, not even for an instant. There really isn't even a such thing as an “instant”.

24
---
It is a constant state of flux. In this way nothing is solid. The body we see before us or in the mirror, the body we “feel” is really a process, not a thing. In this way we can say the form perceived by our senses is empty of any inherent qualities.

Our brain tries to find order in all this sensory stimulation by labeling what is perceived and creating stories about it.

Hell can not exist in the present. It can not exist without thought. It takes form in regrets from the past and fears of the future.

Time is a product of thought. Time is a product of memory and projection. The present is outside time. There is no present “moment”. The notion of a “moment” implies something came before and after. “Before”

25
---
and “after” are ideas rooted in thought. There is no “before” or “after” outside of thought. Without them there can be no “moment”. The present is not a moment. It is not even part of a “flow”. Flow implies movement through time - flowing from somewhere at some time to somewhere at some later time.

The present is and is not. It arises in response to causes and conditions. It has no intrinsic qualities. Nor do any of it's causes or conditions. Form is emptiness and emptiness is form.

The present arises outside dualistic thinking. There is no room for hell. Outside thought there are only manifestations of causes and conditions. There is no “body” to suffer. There are no labels for pain or pleasure and thus no differentiation between manifestations. Nirvana is samsara and samsara is nirvana. No heaven and no hell outside mind.

When Thich Nhat Hanh refers to mental formations as organic he

26
---
means they are transient. They arise and decay based on causes and conditions.

I have observed the bio-chemical(organic)nature of thought. Mental formations are based on thought. Maybe my interpretation is based on the thought-model I have of my body.

Since form is empty the thoughts arise from emptiness. I observed the thoughts arising seemingly out of nothing. What particular thoughts arose depended on conditions. If I held myself in a neutral state nothing arose. It seems whatever came up needed a seed. Very subtle changes in my state of awareness allowed thoughts to bubble forth.

I thought I was observing an organic, bio-chemical process, but the body is empty (form is emptiness) so maybe the whole movement of thought is empty.

My observation is not in conflict with Hanh's definition of “organic”. Something was observing this

27
---
and thought imposed language on it. This language is what we use to label what we think we remember about being on the bottom of the ocean. How can we remember what it was like to be completely dissolved? It is impossible. Since we can't really remember the experience we make stuff up. The experience is beyond language.

Thich Nhat Hanh's description of it as organic is a good enough way to describe it. Mental formations are inherently empty. The rise and fall based on causes and conditions. In the meditative state thoughts are truly like clouds.They rise and float through. At the purest level there is no agenda and no urgency. No clinging and no call to action. Just detached observation.

Is it possible to live with no investment in our thoughts? What is alive? What is watching? How many of us have truly experienced unity with the universe, with god? When this happens, who is there to bear witness?

What is a “lifetime”?

When we think of death we picture the decomposition of the body.

28
---
This is how we usually draw the line between lifetimes. When we read the Buddhist or Vedic texts about reincarnation we picture eons of passing from one physical form  and arising in another. Unless we die by accident we picture going through physical stages of birth, maturation, old age and physical death.

We picture an old body from which the animating source has left. Some think of this animating source as some sort of celestial body, a soul, that survives the death of the body that moves on to another plane of existence or returns to this plane in some form.

In some religious beliefs we go to heaven or hell. In some we return again and again to learn whatever it is we are supposed to learn here. Only then is our soul free to move on. Then we can merge forever into the cosmic ocean.

According to Buddhist belief all forms are manifestations of causes and conditions. When the causes and conditions cease so do the manifestations. A new “spirit” does not understand this. It believes everything (forms, sensations, mental formations)

29
---
is solid. Over countless rounds it learns the truth until it frees itself - extinguishes all causes and conditions. At that point it becomes free from the wheel. In Hinayana literature it never returns. In Mahayana it may become Bodhisattva and chose to return until all sentient beings have ascended (nirmanakaya). 

Either way the basic story seems to be that consciousness arises with a new human form (eventually). Consciousness stays with the body until the body passes away. If causes and conditions persist consciousness arises again in a new body. This repeats until the required causes and conditions cease.

A simplistic point of view is that each round on the wheel of birth and death is marked by a physical lifetime and full realization requires countless rounds. Is this what the original authors meant?

30
---
I offer an alternative model that seems not at all in conflict with the literature. I am familiar with and is not so mystical around the topic of death and the hereafter.

First of all, humor me and entertain the idea that there is nothing beyond “physical” death (Is there any residue? That depends on whether you believe any of this is real?). A consciousness arises with the body and dies with it. That's it. All gone. No residual awareness or energy, just gone. Other bodies arise with their own consciousness, but the have no relationship to any other.

That consciousness will undergo countless evolutions during the lifetime of that body, countless metaphorical death because the body, feelings, perceptions, mental formations, and perhaps even the consciousness are empty of intrinsic nature. They are best viewed as processes. There is nothing solid about them. In other words they are

31
---
constantly undergoing death and rebirth. This happens countless times until the body passes. when the body passes everything stops.

Maybe consciousness persists while there is breath? Can we redefine “death” as teh cessation of breath? Can we say when the breath leaves this body (what body?) does this consciousness? Is there more than one kind of consciousness or one lens through which to view it? Thich Nhat Hanh mentions consciousness for each aggregate. Are they also interdependent? Can one exist without the others? Do the other forms of consciousness survive if the body dies?

May we say that even though the body sensation and mental formations are constantly changing - dying and being reborn, as log as breath remains consciousness will persist? How else can we explain memory? Can there be memory without a brain? Memories can be passed from body to body. What happens to memory after the body is gone? Can memories be lost over time or do they just become dormant as potential.

We have no reliable memory from previous incarnations of the body yet we have memories of events related to the current body? Is this true? 

It seems futile to speculate about what happens after breath ceases. Nobody can return from this with a verifiable account, so I'll keep my comments within

32
---
the framework of breath (this “body”). Everything I've read or heard about karma and transmigration of consciousness fits within this framework and it is useless to speculate about what might happen outside it.

Eastern mystical assertions about (physical) impermanence align with western science idea that matter can be decomposed into smaller and smaller particles, all of which are active and in process of constant change. Nothing stands still even for and instant.

At the macro level, perceived by our five physical senses, things appear to be solid. At the particle level everything is in a constant state of flux. It all undergoes a constant process of birth, death, and rebirth Is what we call consciousness just a collection of memories and reflections?

In the very instant of perception there is no space for thought, no labels. Those come later as memories, reflections, and projections. Are these collectively what we identify as “consciousness”? It doesn't seem

33
---
so mystical in this context. Maybe “enlightenment” is simply clarification of the filters we apply to our memories. Maybe this is why so many sages put emphasis on staying with the present moment.

Are we saying body, breath, and consciousness arise and cease together? Are they inter-dependent, cause and condition for each other? None can exist without the others? Is it possible to still thought? If it is possible is it then possible to pierce the veil to see behind the curtain, to experience unity with whatever is beyond dependent arising, or is such merely another intellectual construct of limited mind?

What is the practical value of this pursuit? Spiritual development, in the sense of learning not to take the play of life and speculations about the hereafter too seriously? Regrets about the past and worries about the future (in this life and beyond) seem to be the roots of suffering. Maybe its enough to live in the present with whatever pleasures and pains come our way. Maybe

34
---
speculation about whether it is real or not is just another form of play? Maybe if we worry less about the rules we can enjoy the game more - while it lasts. Maybe if we worry less about how others judge us we can enjoy a more profound sense of humor about it all and just play our best while we still have breath? 

Maybe we can judge others (real or imagined) less, let them play the way they want, and simply love them with the understanding we are all connected, either as independent manifestations or as products of our own creation?

Nietzsche said to love even our enemies. Those who love us usually tell us what the like about us. Our enemies tell us what they don't. In the end what others say doesn't really matter. We are free to follow our own light as long as we are willing to accept the results.

It is better to live in love than

35
---
it is to live in hate and despair. We are better off if we understand that our hate and despair are our own creation. We only latch onto external events to validate our world view. (really?)

How can I abide the presence of another's suffering without sinking into despair. I fear suffering is contagious. My habitual reaction to despair is aggression. Despair is my enemy so I fight it. If a gentler approach seems to be failing I turn to fight. This does not serve those around me well.

When I see someone stuck in despair I first try to wave them off of it. “Don't worry” I tell them “It will pass”. If they remain stuck I feel helpless, so I turn up the heat. “Snap out of it! You are doing this to yourself.”

That never helps. It just makes me part of the problem. If I don't know what to say maybe the best I can do is just be available with compassion and understand that ultimately we have to come to terms with our own problems.	If we are

36
---
suffering from our thoughts the most anybody can do for us is show empathy for our suffering and love us. This is difficult to do when suffering of others awakens our own demons. When this happens we are not present for the other. We are distracted as we battle our own mind. It is not easy to be there for others when we are overwhelmed with our own problems.

Does this mean we should not try? Should we wait until we are “qualified” so don't make a mess? Or should we engage with good intentions and learn from experience? If we cannot offer positive energy can we just keep our mind out of it and simply operate from the heart? Can we calmly abide with our own demons and simply show love and unity with the other?

Sometimes the other is hoping for helpful suggestions from us and they become agitated when we can't offer anything they can resonate with in that moment. They may retort “You are no help!” or “You don't understand!” 

Can we remain available

37
---
without reacting habitually or aggressively? They may decide they don't want us around in that moment. Can we depart lovingly, leaving the door open? Can we then work lovingly with the feelings that arise from this sense of helplessness and rejection so we will be fully present.

I am seeking relief from suffering. At this moment staying present bubbles up malaise. The blue sky and such offer no relief. One thing I recently read seems to have some positive influence. I may find refuge in caring for others.

I want to dissolve . I often wish for oblivion. This could be framed a a death wish. I feel world-weary. This begs the question “What is this world?” I believe much of my suffering comes from the habitual perception of the self as “solid”.

38
---
I am influenced by the things I've been reading and watching about interdependent arising. If all is interdependent and suffering arises from the illusion of independent self perhaps shifting from internal to external focus will help dissolve the illusion of independent “I” and the suffering that comes from attachment to it.

Everybody endures their share of suffering, even bodhisattvas. maybe the best we can do is be there for each other. It is like a wave realizing it really is the ocean. The ocean is a vast movement. Individual waves chop around on the surface. All a wave needs to do to avoid the chop is merge with the whole. (This can be refined. Saying it needs to avoid the chop or merge with the whole implies it is separate. It is not.)

Maybe though the wave shouldn't worry too much about it. Waving is just something the ocean does. The wave will naturally form, chop around or a while (dance of life) and then it will subside. Maybe when the wave understands it is the ocean it can feel free to just wave - wave with compassion for other waves that


39
---
have not obtained this realization. Maybe, realized or not, waves have no choice. Maybe individual volition is only a concept. It may just be the nature of the ocean to wave. In any event, the surface of the ocean cannot be calm until every wave attains this realization.

A wave may not have the power to make any vow. Each wave is the ocean, so how can any wave have individual nature or will. Perhaps waves should understand this and stop chasing even the idea of attainment (release). Each is already one with the ocean. 

If everything is already in accordance with the nature of the ocean how can there be any difference between suffering and ecstasy, heaven and hell, good and bad, or any of the other polar opposites? All the wave has to do is wave. 

The wave should also understand it isn't just the ocean. It is also the sky, the wind, the movement of the planets, gravity, and all formations 

40
---
that lie within and surrounding the ocean. Without all of these the wave cannot exist. It is harder to see this relationship in reverse, but it's there. The wave is a manifestation of all these things. None of these things arises independently. They all rise and subside together. They define each other. 

All of these things are products of our consciousness. If they we are not here they are not here and if they are not here we are not here. This isn't to say we or they are not “real”. It just means we and they are not solid. We and they don't have individual nature. Everything depends on everything else for it's existence.

KARMA
Thich Nhat Hanh mentioned “habit handed down to your by your parents and ancestors”. This is a more practical view of how karma (causes and conditions) can span lifetimes. Not only do we hold in us the lessons passed down through oral and written traditions. Causes, conditions, and propensities are baked into our genetic code. In this sense we are literal reincarnations of our ancestors.

There is a saying “We are what we do.” Our habits get baked into our genetic code. We hold the habit energies of our ancestors. We literally

41
---
inherit their karma. There is no magical “Bardo” experience where we die and become some disembodied soul that chooses some body to enter through reincarnation. Note I said we “hold” the habit energies of our ancestors. I did not say “we are” the habit energies of our ancestors.

To be sure, actions taken in one generation can impact future generations. This is true at the individual and collective levels. Succeeding generations may have little or no choice but to accept the benefits or suffering of such actions. With habit energies we have more choice.

First, we have to learn to stay in the present moment. It sometimes is unpleasant because some darkness may bubble up from our store-consciousness. If we stay with it though we can transform or dissolve it (liberation). If we run away into past or future (distraction) we aren't thereto work with it. If we don't deal with it we will likely pass it on.

We can vow to stay and work it out. We do this to free ourselves from suffering

42
---
and we do it to keep it from spreading and polluting the karma of others. Good karma has the opposite effect. Either way the growth over lifetimes can be exponential (one to two, two to four, and so on...). Even if we inherit the consequences of our ancestors actions we can purify it by how we interpret and respond. 

Take for example global warming. This karma has ripened over many generations. Earlier generations may have been unaware of this trend, but the current generations cannot deny the evidence. This generation can take concrete actions to mitigate the problem or it can kick the problem down the road to the next generation - and on it goes. No mystical magic here.

Headings:
	Karma
	Emptiness
	Manifestations
	Who needs a guru?
	Dangers of guru worship
	Who needs a sanga?

43
---
“We have been running all our lives as well as in our previous lives, that is, in the form of our ancestors and our parents.” (Hanh, p. 39) (implies temporal continuity)

SUCHNESS
“I have arrived, I am home,
In the here and in the now,
I am solid, I am free,
In the ultimate I dwell.”

More headings
. Polyamory? Is it unfair to ask your love partner not to screw other people? Is it ok to allow your love partner to have romantic relationships with other people?

. Dealing with disrespectful people. How many times do you forgive them without appearing weak? How to deal with the voice in your head that tells you you are being a pushover when you practice forgiveness?

. What is observing?
“Emptiness” in western scientific terms is the quantum field. In simplified terms the quantum field is made

44
---
of probability waves (waves of virtual particles?). Even in empty space these particle waves exist (emptiness is form potentially). The virtual particles have a probabilistic potential to settle into many locations and states. These probabilities exist simultaneously in the virtual state. The particles require an observer in order to settle into a specific location and/or state (manifest)(form is emptiness).

Who or what is the observer? It is not possible to observe something without interacting with it in some way. It is not possible to interact with something without changing it in some way. In effect, the observer becomes part of whatever is observed. Subject and object become entwined.

This paraphrase from “Who Am I?”(Ramana Maharishi) illustrates the entanglement. “As with a coiled rope which in dim light one might think is a snake, until the illusion of the snake has been dispelled the rope cannot be seen.” The snake and the rope are products of the senses, perception, and interpretation (observation).

Likewise, until

45
---
the illusion the world is real has been dispelled , until thought is quiet the observer cannot be fully experienced. (Actually, the world is real in the sense that we create it. I need to think more about this. And, what do I mean by “experiencing the observer”?)

When the concept of the world is understood to be a sort of dream and thought has been silenced (dwelling fully in the present) what remains is the self, the observer. If you dive into the ocean you will dissolve as you go deeper. 

At the bottom (deep meditation or death) you will find the true self (observer). If you ascend (into thought an the illusion the world you see is real) you will not be able to articulate the experience of pure self because it is beyond thought and language.

Ramana states the self is like the shade and the world of things is like the sun. He asserts anyone who chooses to go back and forth between sun and shade is a fool. This point of view runs parallel to ideas of heaven and hell. If we consider our earthly existence to be hell the desire to dissolve is understandable. Is this the correct interpretation though?

According to Buddhist belief samsara is nirvana. In other words heaven and hell are just products of dualistic thinking. They exist as products of our preference and clinging to one set of circumstance and stimulus over another. Is this a fact or is it just another mind game? I may have this wrong. The first noble truth is the truth of suffering. Is all suffering a product of mind or is there real suffering in this world and we are just trying to explain it away? (cognitive dissonance)

Whether suffering is real or not the Bodhisattva vow is to return 

46
---
again and again until all beings “reach the other shore” (no return? What does this mean exactly?). (I need to go deeper into the nature of suffering here. What is my specific definition of it?) Ramana Maharishi maintains those who have experience the grace of god/guru can no longer escape. 

They are destined for the other shore. They are protected by the grace of god/guru, but they must make the journey their own. Thus it is not considered selfish having reached the bottom of the ocean to stay there. There is no need to return. Stay and be a beacon of grace for others.

I see no conflict between Hinayana, Mahayana, and Hindu beliefs in terms of returning. I differ in my interpretation of what death and returning are. Physical death is final. When breath leaves the body consciousness goes with it, but

47
---
death and resurrection occur countless times in the span of a physical lifetime. Countless beings are birthed and destroyed. As long as there is breath the residue of consciousness survives. Each new breath is a return.

[The choice to return or not is constantly made in the vanishing present.Whether to return and in what form is subject to karma. In each vanishing moment we make choices and these choices determine how we will manifest or not in the next moment.] (Is there really any choice about whether to return in this physical lifetime?)

Who manifests to who? manifestation requires and observer. This brings us back to the question of “What is observing?” We are back on the bottom of the ocean. There is no describing it because the true essence of the observer is beyond thought and language.

Ramana likens the “self” (God) to a movie screen. Consciousnesses

48
---
projects the movie. Our attention is on the movie. Without the screen there can be no movie. If we look closely we can see hints of the screen, but our attention is on the movie (thought). (Important: The screen is not an observer. It is a canvas.) If we turn off the movie (thought) the screen is available to view. However, as Ramana says, we can't really stand back and observe the self.

When thought is silent we merge with the self. When thought is silent we dissolve. We become as a river flowing into an ocean. The river is absorbed by the ocean. It loses its river identity. It loses its river consciousness. 

Note: “Die” is not the right word to use here, merge or unify are more accurate (no-birth and no-death). Note also: The notion of merging or unifying with the ocean is not meant to imply we disappear into nothingness. The ocean, just like empty space, is pure potential. All things manifest from it.

I need to clarify or maybe correct my previous notion of the observer. Consciousness is the observer. Our world is projection of

49
---
thought on the canvas of the void. The canvas is beyond thought. It does not observe anything. It is not a “watcher”. Consciousness is the only observer. When thought is silent the observer dissolves. Consciousness is perception and thought. What is perceived? If form is emptiness are not the objects of perception just conscious projections?

Consciousness is the creator. It projects its creations on the medium of the void. And, what are these creations? Dreams. I am agnostic toward Whiteheads assertion that this creative process is somehow biased in a way that promotes “order”.

What is order? Who or what is to say? If order can even be defined, what evidence is there that any influences are moving in that direction? Should we accept the implication that the creative process is in some way intelligent?

50
---
The desire for intelligence and order seems likely just another attachment of the human mind, grounded in the desire to avoid suffering. If this creative force is “intelligent” it seems limiting to believe creative intelligence is anything like human intelligence, or that it conforms to human ideas of morality and compassion.

To be clear, “consciousness” is not the same as “mind”. Consciousness is a pure creative principle. Consciousness can create anything without regard to conventional notions of compassion and morality. 

The mind/body applies filters on what is created, or at least on the way it is interpreted. These filters are limited by learned behaviors that are designed to insure our survival, in the present and projected future. They are designed to seek pleasure and avoid pain. The very notions of pain and pleasure reside in the mind/body.

Observe a thought like a cantle and stay present. Don't be carried away.

51
---
Meditation:
There are different types of meditation:

. Meditation on the breath, or and object (concentration meditation), to stay in the present moment. Stay with the breath or the object (for example, a candle). Allow thoughts to float by. If a thought feels deeply rooted you can come back to it with analytical meditation.

. Analytical meditation (insight meditation). Observe a thought. Identify and follow it's roots. Each branch may connect to another. Note how thought impulses bubble up and inspire action.

It is best not to mix meditation types. If during concentration meditation a thought continues to arise, remember it and use it later as a seed for analytical meditation. Don't be carried away by it.

Sangha:
Don't make the sangha an organized religion. Orange robes don't mean anything. They are no more than religious trappings. 

52
---
Real bodhisattvas are clothed by their actions, but actions can also be false robes. Meditate and know yourself. Trust nobody who professes to tell you how to do it. Trust that it is in you. You are a living Buddha. All you have to do is realize it and walk your path. Nobody can tell you how you should do it. Youir karmas make your path unique to you.

The only way to recognize a realized bodhisattva is to be one. By then you need no blessings and no advice from anyone. If you encounter other realized beings all you need do is commune with them. Pure joy. No need to attain anything. Nothing to attain because you have all already reached the other shore. Just be as a beacon for other travelers (Each must travel alone.)

I remember: Someone in the Davis sngha “royalty” joking under their breath to another

53
---
about event attendance (donations) “We need more robes!”

Mind dropping: Frightened people are dangerous.

If you love somebody tell them. Don't let unexpressed love turn to sadness. Give your love freely to others. It is really a gift to yourself (whether they accept it  or not). If you are unsure your love is genuine don't fake it. Keep the feeling as a seed and see if it grows. If it is real you will eventually be sure of it.

Love meditation: Start by saying “I love you ____” to each person you truly love. As you go down the list feel it deeply. As you look back on your life you may be surprised how many there are.

With this love deeply seated in your heart meditate on inter-dependency and send some of that love out. Then go deeper. As in Thich Nhat Hanh's flower meditation, see the entire universe in

54
---
everything and allow your love to expand even more. Include all things, regardless of their karma (good, bad, ugly).

Why do so many people carry hate in their hearts. What is the anatomy of hate? Suffering? Fear? Are any people simply born hateful?

Some people are born without conscience. To them the world and other have utility value only. These people have great capacity for evil. Most of us are not built this way. Most of us are not wired for pure evil.

Is power a form of validation? Why do some people in power seem to always want mre? Why are they willing to destroy others to get it? I imagine to some it is a form of erotic fulfillment. For some it is means to an end. Power attracts sexual partners and sycophants. Power yields special privileges.

55
---
More power comes with more goodies. Power also protects.

Powerful people can exercise more control over their environment. The rich and powerful don't have to worry about climate change, the economy, or instability of world events. They can afford climate controlled environments. They can afford to live in the best places on this planet. They can move to safe havens - away from conflict zones, or they can be warlords. They have diversified wealth - more than they will ever need.

Maybe no matter how much they have their appetites are insatiable (hungry ghosts), or maybe they continue to accumulate because the suffer such intense fear of change and loss.

Learn to listen in order to provide relief to others. Just that. Allow them to express themselves. Open your heart to receive anything, even anger and accusations. You are

56
---
not there to judge or direct. You are not there even to protect yourself. Sometimes the person you are listening to needs to lash out and you are the closest target. Don't take it personally. Don't become defensive It has nothing to do with you. Just listen. Let them get it out. Let them find their balance. 

The better you know yourself, then more you can accept yourself with unconditional love and compassion, the more helpful you can be to others. Don't assume you know how to solve their problems. Avoid clumsy attempts at quick fixes. Those are usually more for your comfort.

If the person you are talking to feels they are not being heard they will only resent you and they will suffer even more because they will feel so alone. Just be there and listen deeply deeply and compassionately, so they don't feel alone, so they they feal heard and respected. This takes skill and a quiet mind. Practice dealing with your own strong emotions. If you can do it you can help a lot.

Don't panic. Don't try to rush the process. Each person must walk their own path. Just be there for them one hundred percent.

57
---
To be fully there for others we need to be able to calm our own emotions. We must invest time each day to train our mind/body for this. When we listen to others it can stir up emotions in them and us. We must guard against retaliating against them if they say unkind things to us.

If they know us well they know what buttons to push. We must also guard against the temptation to project our solutions onto their problems. It can be difficult to simply listen when we see someone suffering, especially if it is someone dear to us.

Whether they are saying unkind things to us or we feel someone else or some situation is causing them to suffer, strong emotions may arise for us We should practice frequently to work with this. We need to understand a couple of things about emotions. 

The first thing is that we are something much more vast. This vastness observes the 

58
---
five senses, but is not effected by them. Breath and stay present.

The second thing is that emotions are impermanent. They are products of mind. Emotions come and go. Breath and gently observe them ebb and flow.

Vastness? Observer? Bottom of the Ocean? Emptiess or Nothing? Emptiness as a noun? Universe? Use of the term observer implies personification. It is ok to say the senses exist within some sort of context. To describe that context as an “observer” personifies it. It implies some form

59
---
of human intelligence. Whether context is intelligent is open to debate. All these terms display limitations of language. I believe “context” is most accurate.

Aggregates:
. Form
. Sensation
. Perception
. Mental Formation
. Consciousness

Using “creation” as a noun. Maybe capitalize it? This avoids the need to refer to a “Creator”. Creator is another personification. “I” is commonly used to personify the collection of aggregates. Is it correct to use “context” as a noun? That implies context is something that contains everything.

Mooji is incorrect to assert existence of any observer outside of consciousness. Consciousness is pure awareness. It is aware of the mental formation

60
---
that asserts “I am”. Pure consciousness has no sense of self. Self is a mental formation based on sensory inputs and perceptions. Self is a product of thought. The concept of “universe” is a product of thought. Can pure consciousness comprehend its own context? Is it possible through meditation or other means to directly experience the context of consciousness? 

Is it possible to experience anything beyond thought? If it is, how would we comprehend it? What would be the framework? Images? Abstract symbols? Maybe images, but then how would we interpret them? What other “languages” can the mind/body use?

Stop looking for God. God is here and now.

61
---
If you want to see me, if you want me to manifest you must be here now (pure mind). The me presented to you by sense, perception and mental formation is not me as I am. It is a memory. If you want the experience of me, this is as close as you can get. For this to be as accurate as possible you must be here, now.

Manifestations based on memories are unreliable because memory is unreliable. The senses can be fooled. Perceptions are learned patterns, and mental formations are filtered by thought. Mental formations built on memory and memory, no matter how recent, is subject to interpretation and bias.

In any case your mental formation of me misses the mark. I am beyond thought. I am empty of

62
---
individual nature. If you go beyond thought you will find me in everything. The manifestation of me constructed by sense perception and mind and noticed by the miracle of consciousness. It is a singularity in the field of all, as is the manifestation of you. The real you and I are one. (You and I arise interdependently.)

Manifestations are not really so mysterious. They are adequately explained by quantum field theory. The real miracle is conscious awareness. What is the ground of consciousness? By what causes does it arise? How pervasive is it? Is it unique to human manifestation?

If all is empty of inherent existence, if all is but arising interdependently from causes how can consciousness be limited? In quantum field theory nothing manifests without an observer. Is consciousness the all-pervasive observer, giving rise to the myriad manifestations? Is consciousness the ultimate all-pervasive creator? By association, all manifestations are miraculous. All is holy.

63
---
Karma is instantaneous and it is sticky. Treat “other” with compassion and loving kindness. We suffer from the violence we perpetrate. When we violence (physical, mental, or psychological) to another we transport ourselves into the hell realm. “I” arises fro consciousness. So does “other”.

Realized mind recognizes “other” as mental formation arising from the field o all possibilities, the same field as “I”. There is no separation. Doing violence to “other” does violence to “I”. If anger and violence become habit energies they will “stick”. They will continue to feed suffering unless they are recognized and transformed.

The root of anger is fear. As fear subsides so will anger. Fear cannot be healed with anger and violence. It can't eat it's own head. It can only be healed by compassion and loving kindness.

64
---
Grief over death and loss is bookends with love and attachment.

Some people can't truly love because they can't take the pain.

Be willing to suffer the pain, for yourself and others.

Don't ignore the pain, but don't dwell too much on it.

Celebrate love.

Live this bitter-sweet life fully.

Who am I?
I am my actions?
The consequences of my actions shape this world.
My ripples go on forever.

65
---
“Every second I am on the path out of suffering. Suffering is there to guide me.” (Hanh, Heart of the Buddha, p. 129)

This doesn't mean we are constantly suffering. Life is not suffering. When we are not surrounded by suffering we should simply enjoy it. We should not create suffering for ourselves. When we are suffering we can follow our practice to transform and learn from it.

If we look into our suffering we can see what things we think and do that cause it. Knowing the causes we can see what we need to pay attention to. We can see where we stepped off the path and what we can do to step back onto it. The Buddhist precepts are a good path, but not the only one.

Gratitude and fear of loss are bookends.

How do we use bad habits to give ourselves hope? In other words, we may cling to bad habits to give ourselves some sense of familiarity and control. Our habits are not imposed from the outside. We choose them. Working on them gives us a sense of stability and certainty. We stay in this mindset of “If I can just master these habit energies my life will be better.” 

How about using government subsidized regulated Uber-like ride sharing for the last mile in the public transit chain? We could tax everyone and then pull government subsidies from that revenue base to subsidize peoples use of public transit.

Each action is a karmic starburst. The ripples go on forever. I am my actions.

66
---
Release from Eight Concepts (middle way)
No birth (birth defined ad becoming from nothing) and no-death (returning to nothing)
No permanence and no dissolution
No coming and no going
No one and no many (no sparation)

As much as we wish it, we have no assurance of eternal life (in any form). We are known by our physical form and by what we say and do. Our influence may go on forever, but we do not. All that will be left of us is our legacy, living on through the thoughts, speech, and actions of those who come after us. Nobody knows if the residue of “I” survives death.

I am of the nature to grow old.
I am of the nature to experience failing health.
Everything and everyone I love is of the nature to change. There is no way I can avoid being separated from them.
My only true possessions are my actions.
There is no way to escape their consequences. (no way for me in this life, and no way for the world, even after I'm gone)
They are the ground on which I stand. (whatever “I” is)

67
---
I am here until I am not My manifestation is impermanent. Actually, I am never not. I'm am always becoming. All that will remain are the consequences of my actions. Will those go on forever? Can the karmic chain be broken? What is the residue of this manifestation?

Who am “I”?
I am consciousness.
I am my actions.

Try to think of something that came from nothing. Try to think of something that doesn't eventually become something else. Can anything become nothing?

Rest in the cool waters of this aimless moment. Ride the wave of dharma.

To love properly, is it necessary to retain this physical form?

If non of this world is real, nothing dies and there can be no residual imprint. (It is real to the observer, in the moment, but there is nothing solid or permanent.)

68
---
If this is true does anything we do matter? Are we free to make our own rules as long as we are willing to accept the consequences in this lifetime? (Yes. It matters. Everything we do has karmic implications.)

Is consciousness the ocean, the field of potentiality?

Old woman, what was the spring of your  life? You are here with your daughter, so you clearly knew love. Knowing this is the end-game, what really matters?

This body is host  to perceptions, feelings, mental formations and consciousness. I am not just this body.

Can consciousness be without the other aggregates. Can consciousness be without an object? Consciousness of all the aggregates(including itself) is “I”. All is dynamic, impermanent and interdependent.

69
---
Is radical acceptance the antidote to anxiety and depression?

To fully enjoy the rose you must also accept the rose? Why not just remove the thorns? Does the removal of the thorns really diminish the beauty of the rose? You might argue “Well, if you remove the thorns then it isn't the same flower any more. “ Who cares? If you don't like something the way it is, why not change it? You don't have to just accept whatever is thrown at you.

Yes. If you can accept everything it might save you some work. You will agitate less. But, why not put in a little work to make things the way you want them?

To enjoy happiness you must learn how to deal with anger and sadness when they arise. Emotions don't arise in a vacuum. There may not be anything like “pure” happiness. If other emotions intrude you have to figure out if they bother you enough to do something about it.

On the other hand, if you focus on the thorns you might miss the beauty of the flower. Thorns are part of the flower. You can still enjoy the flower as long as you don't touch the thorns. The thorns have their own beauty. If you want to enjoy the fullness of the rose leave the thorns be.

Gibran talks about the thorniness of love.

If our heart is large enough we don't suffer.

Do animals have to behave according to some code in order to assure themselves a good rebirth? It is doubtful they have any awareness of such things. Is there any such thing as a “bad” animal? Is there anything such as “bad” animal behavior?

Why should humans be

70
---
bound to any particular code. Animals don't worry about their actions or the afterlife. Why should humans?

Learn how to connect with others without trying to fix them or control situations.

Why bother to maintain this body? Because, this body is the vessel of consciousness. Give it what it needs, but no more.

Choose the middle way in all things.

Where does sensory input meet perception?

Combinations of sensory inputs reveal corresponding faces of seeds lying in consciousness. The mind builds stories around combinations of inputs. The stories accompany or create qualities of feeling and tendency to water certain seeds.

Think of the qualities of feelings and mental formations that they evoke as faces of seeds.

We can choose which seeds to wat4er and which not to water. We tend to water out of  habit. We need to stand back and make more carefully considered decisions rather than being slaves to habit.

71
---
Nothing is solid, so how can anything decay?

Nothing arises without everything else, so how can anything be alone?

Nothing is solid, so how can anything be permanent? We are not substance. We are flow.

There can be no object without subject and there can be no subject without object. The object is in the subject and the subject is in the object. There is no object before the subject. There is no subject before the object.

They are dependent-arisings. This is true for physical and mental manifestations. It is true for all forms of sense consciousness.

There are no two individuals to agree on the existence or attributes of this table because there are no individuals. Everything arises together. There is no separation of one from other.

72
---
If you want to change your world let go of the old one. You really have no choice. Accept impermanence and non-self. Clinging is suffering.

You must also let go of ideas of what the new world should look like. This is another form of clinging. What is the value of thinking about the future?

If you find yourself lacking compassion burn down your hut. Do others the same service.

If I take away anger, craving and fear what am I? If I drop all the destructive emotions will I die? Will I die if I give myself completely over to sadness? Can I be sad and still do good in this world - take care of people and things in my life?

Can I will myself to death? What if I just let everything go - including my attachment to this body? Will I fade out? At what point can I just drop the whole agenda?

73
---
I saw my dad in the hospital right before he died. I know he wanted to die at home, but it was too hard on the rest of the family. When I saw him he was in a state of total acceptance. He was pure love. He must have found comfort in the knowledge that it would all soon be over. There was nothing left to say or do - a state of grace.

I told himI would come back the following day to see him. He just looked at me so gently and asked “Why?”. He knew what I didn't at the time. I hugged him and went home. When I walked in the door the phone rang. It was the hospital calling to tell me he had passed. I never really cried properly - not to this day. Too late now.

We had planned to spread his ashes on his favorite fishing lake, but they are still in a box somewhere. Nobody knows where.

I haven't talked to my mom for over 20 years. My sister called the other day and left a message. I can't bring myself to call her back. Either my family needs money again or my mom is dead.

I want to fade away, but my daughter still needs me.

My dad dropped the agenda on his death-bed. My mom probably did too - even the desire to see me again or to meet her grand daughter. Do I have to wait for death? Can I drop it all while I'm alive and can be here for my daughter and the other people who need me? It is paradoxical because my desire to help and comfort them  is the most important part of the agenda.

I guess the answer is no. As long as you feel a duty to this world you can't just fade out. Maybe underneath everything life is a supreme sacrifice. Can we find joy in sacrifice even with the accompanying sadness and despair? Does joy have anything to do with happiness or does it instead come from our relationship with god - whatever that is to us? Do we find god in sacrifice?

74
---
Philosophical thought produces fiction. So do mystical musings. Does high-order thinking have a purpose? Maybe the only purpose for the brain is to operate the body and propagate it. It requires imagination to anticipate and respond to a changing environment. Maybe our desire to understand our world and ourselves comes from our survival-driven need for control. This is where our myths come from, and, from our myths come gods.

More evolved beings should not take advantage of less evolved beings.

Even my youngest sister is an old woman now.

Bright spots in a sea of sadness. Life is bitter-sweet, without enough sweetness. Dreams punctuated by reality. Dreams punctuated by other  dreams.

Looking back on unfulfilled dreams. Indulgent self-pity.

75
---
Thinking about thinking till it grinds to a halt.

The logistical thinking and imagination are already baked in. Trust in spontaneity. Release the attachment to convention. Let go of ideas about what the world “should” be. Is it really possible to make a mistake? Is there any “best”? Push the medicine forward? Sometimes it is the thing to do . Pull the medicine back? Sometimes medicine (action) is ot what is needed. Sometimes it is best to just let go.

Flow. Stream entry.

Sometimes quiet and serene, with surface smooth as glass. Sometimes raging and crashing, like a storm. But, always flowing.

Clouds moving in snapshots.

Watch from one spot as the seasons change. Watch teh trees and plants go through a full cycle. Watch the skys and the

76
---
weather. Watch your own manifestation. Flowing. Part of the stream.

We are all quantum. The act of observing causes changes to the system. The object arises in response to the act of observation. It is not possible to observe without becoming part of the system. It isn't possible to observe something without causing changes to it. Becoming part of the system also changes the observer. When quantum events interact they give birth.

What comes comes. What goes goes. Don't get too caught up in the details, the noise.

Fade to obscurity? No. Just be without attachment. No need to pose. No effort is required to fit in. Fitting in is not a choice. Everything fits where it is supposed to in any given instance.

Be a polite monster. Be a monster with heart. Follow a path with heart. Eat anything that gets in the way. :)

77
---

